Nine Men’s 
Morris:
Strategy

A Guide for Beginners and Intermediate Players

2nd Edition

Benjamin Brandwood

Copyright © 2026 by Benjamin Brandwood

"All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by copyright law.” 
For permission requests, write to the author at benmarkbrandwood@gmail.com

Book Cover and Illustrations by Benjamin Brandwood

NMM_Strategy social media, feedback form and mailing list subscription is available here:
https://nmmstrategy.start.page/




2nd edition (2026)
ISBN: 978-0-646-73584-9 – E-book
ISBN: 978-0-646-73585-6 – Softcover
ISBN: 9798249199678 - Hardcover




Preface
1. Introduction
1.1 Nine Men’s Morris in Early Literature
1.2 Nine Men’s Morris on Stone and Wood
1.3 All Four Corners (of the Globe)
2. Modern history
2.1 Masters of Mills
2.2 Switzerland (1935, 1974 – 1984)
2.3 Hutton-le-Hole (1987 - 1997)
2.4 Germany (1999 – 2024/25)
2.5 Switzerland (1984 – 2025)
2.6. Other tournaments of note
2.7 The Tournament Process
3. Symbolism and Religious Connections
4. The Game Itself
4.1 Naughts and Crosses
4.2 The Board
4.4 Game Counters
4.4 Stages of Play
4.5. Winning Conditions
4.6. Variations
4.7. Basic Rules of Play
5. Gameplay
5.1. How to win
5.2. Common Mistakes
5.3. Where to play
5.4 Quick games
5.5. Online games
5.6. Long games
6. Resources
6.1. Sanmill
6.2. The perfect database
6.3. WMD - texts
6.4. Mühle Lehrbuch
6.5. Brilliant Mill
6.6. Malom Strategy
6.7. Malom
7. Some Games
7.1 Game One
7.2. Try, Try Again (Game Two)
7.3 Alternate Game Two
7.4. A Better Beginning
7.5. Game Three
7.6. Common Starting Positions
7.7. A Gambit
7.8. Last Moves in Stage One
7.9. A Merry-Go-Round
8. Mills
8.1. Protecting Open Mills
8.2. Dual Mills and Cardinal Mills
8.3. Entwined Mills
8.4. Separate Mills
8.5. Ending the Game with Mills
8.6. Nullifying Mills
9. Other Winning Strategies
9.1 Springs
9.2. Herding (Winning without Mills)
9.4. Game Four
9.4. Creating Opportunities
10. End Game (first visit)
10.1. Three versus Four to Three versus Three
10.2. Game Five a
10.3. Game 5b
10.4. A Fitting End
11. Further Strategies and Tactics
11.1. Controlling the board
11.2. Creating opportunities, then being patient
12. Part 2 – Mastering Morris
12.1. How to win during placement
12.2. Creating opportunities (Black)
12.3. Creating opportunities (white)
12.4. When to discard your plan
12.5. When to allow a mill in placement
12.6. Which piece to take
12.7. When to make a mill
13. Mid-to-end placement strategy
13.1 Dead placements
13.2. Wrapping up mills
13.3. Which mill to block
13.4. Feeding your mill
13.5. Right angle potential mills
13.6. End placement patterns (black)
13.7. White end placement patterns
13.8. Burning pieces
14. Midgame tactics
14.1. Cannon fodder
14.2. When to allow a mill in movement stage
14.3. Mill redundancy
14.4. Mill abandonment
14.5. Sacrificial mills
14.6. When to abandon a cardinal point
14.7. A list of priorities
15. Opening plays
15.0. Man-to-Man Marking
15.1. Black diamond
15.2. Learning the Mill Rush
Game 1a; parallel lines
Game 1b; parallel lines (alt)
Game 2a; perpendicular lines
Game 2b; perpendicular lines (alt)
Game 3; extended parallel
Game 4; alt extended parallel
Black’s alternate responses
15.3. Inverted Mill Rush
Parallel lines – inverted mill rush.
Perpendicular inverted mill rush
A white mistake;
15.4. Battle lines
15.5. The Z mill
15.6. The open Z mill
15.7. Z Mill, white c4 to d3
15.8. Z mill, white c4 and e3
Game 1; parallel mills
Game 2; Ring round the rosie
Game 3; all along the watchtower
Game 4; Wrapping in black
Game 5; Perpendicular mills
Game 5b; a shoot-out
Game 6; misdirection
Game 7; cut the bottom out
Game 8 – two L’s
Game 9 - Hangman
Game 10; perpendicular mills
Game 11; Roof falls in
Summary of the Z mill c4 e3 game;
15.9. Z mill interrupted
15.10 Black L, white wrap
15.11. Black into white
15.12. Black away from white
15.13. Investigating starting plays on your own
16. The end game (revisited)
16.1. End game priorities
16.2. Examples of zugswang
16.3. 7 vs 4
16.4. 6 vs 4
16.5. 4 vs 4
16.6. 4 vs 3
16.7. 3 vs 3
Example endgame 1 – infinite loop
Endgame 2 – skipping to the other side
17. Conclusion
18. Puzzle Games
18.1. Puzzle 1
18.2. Puzzle 2
18.3. Puzzle 3
18.4. Puzzle 4
18.5. Puzzle 5
18.6. Puzzle 6
18.7. Puzzle 7
18.8. Puzzle 8
18.9. Puzzle 9
18.10. Puzzle 10
18.12. Puzzle 11
18.13. Puzzle 12
19. References
20. Appendix
20.1. The current (09 Nov 2024) list of GM and MM players, from WMD
20.2. Historical tournaments registered with WMD
20.3. QR Code game moves
21. About the Author
22. Acknowledgments
Preface
The intention of this book is to give the reader some insight into the history of the game of Nine Men’s Morris, then to describe the basic rules and outline some free resources available to the player. Next, the book will take the reader through some played games. This enables the discussion of more advanced tactics and aspects of the game without becoming bogged down in minutiae.

Then the book will cover some more advanced concepts of game-play in part 2, and finish up with an in-depth guide showing several starting plays, mid-game strategies and end-game tactics. There are countless games or starting plays made available as QR codes that can be scanned into a mobile device and replayed with a free and recommended Mills app. This is very helpful as the reader can play out the games while reading the discussion on them.
While many online blogs discuss the prevalence and mystery of the game, and boardgame sellers offer up the basic rules, information on actual game-play is hard to find, especially in English. This book also discusses where to locate information and the people who play the game. Many boardgame books devote only between one to 13 pages to the game at most, as part of a compendium of many boardgames. Unlike Chess, which is graced with entire compendiums on strategy and game-play, Merels seems to be a game where tactics and strategy must be almost entirely self-learned. The only exceptions to this are mostly in German, but links are provided in QR code links within the book.
A number of resources will be presented and discussed such as the Mills game by Sanmill, which was used to create the images used in this book, and the perfect database at https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/ which has been used to determine which player moves lead to losing move sequences, and which lead to potential winning move sequences.

We will delve into the initial moves of many plays used by players around the world, and investigate the first moves and entire placements for many recognisable plays.
It is the aim of this book to discuss strategies and techniques at length and it is suited to the beginner as well as intermediate level players. This humble thesis has been written to fill a dearth in the literature on strategies and tactics for the game of mills.
Nine Men’s Morris is a wondrously complex game where there are 8.617 x 1020 (eight hundred and sixty-one million, seven hundred thousand trillion) ways to place the games’ 18 pieces on a 24-place board1. The sheer number of possible branches of game-play therefore must be practically infinite, as far as the human capacity for memory is concerned. So, while every effort has been taken in this manuscript to discuss strategies and tactics at great length, no guide could ever be complete.
As an aid to the reader, the first three games have been recreated in video form, with the links provided in text at the appropriate places. Most other games can be imported via QR code into a free app called Sanmill and viewed on your mobile device while you read along.  It is hoped that this aids the comprehension of descriptions of those games and helps with visualisation. However, for those that prefer the form of notations, the games present in the QR codes have been reproduced in the appendix at the end of the book.
It is recommended for the avid reader to view the games described in the following pages, to memorise some of the starting play sequences and to attempt to solve the puzzles at the end of this book, either in an app or on a physical board. 
Alternatively, the game can be easily drawn on paper or etched into stone and played with locally acquired counters or pebbles. At a pinch, if one found oneself in a field, a few sticks would suffice as well. Programs that allow local 2-player games are available free on the web or in mobile phone app stores, but often start from a beginning position and have limited back moves. The only exception to this is the app by Sanmill which this author greatly recommends.
The many provided snapshots of games or arrangements of pieces as well as the many game walkthroughs and puzzles described in the following text show some different strategies and ways of playing, along with typical player mistakes. Every endeavour has been taken to describe short segments of play between snapshots of pivotal moments that are portrayed in clear figures. Despite this, it may be challenging to follow some sections without playing out the games on a board.
While it has often been said that Mills is a solved game, with perfect play resulting in draws only, the reader will quickly see that this is really only relevant to a computer program environment. The humble human is generally so fallable and wonderfully imperfect that Mills might also not be a solved game. It is simply too difficult to remember every winning sequence of plays. But there are notable patterns that emerge from their investigation, with the lessons learned having applicability to other games.

This book is separated into two parts, with an initial section for beginners, and a second part for intermediate players. Ultimately, this book achieves it’s objective of informing the developing player to the point of being able to challenge other players that once used to dominate the board, letting them know the gentler nuances of the game that were previously not well understood.
It is hoped that you, the reader finds the experience of this book to be enriching and rewarding, and that it gives you a new or improved appreciation for this very old and popular game which has travelled through millennia to reach you.

1. Introduction
Nine Men’s Morris is a two-player strategic board game that dates back to at least the Roman Empire. Nine Men’s Morris has many names; it is known as Mills or Merels, Nine-penny Madell (England), Molenspel (Dutch), Merelles (France) and Nine Men in the Mill (Russia) or Naukhadi (Western India). In Hungary, Nine Men’s Morris is commonly called Malom or malomjáték, both meaning “mill” or “mill game.” In German-speaking Europe, including much of Switzerland, the usual name is Mühle or Mühlespiel, again literally “mill” or “mill game,” and Swiss German dialects also preserve older number-based names like Nünistein / Neunstein (“nine stones”). In Romania, the standard name is Moară, which likewise means “mill,” and you’ll often see players casually refer to “joc de moară,” “the mill game.” This “mill” theme shows up in several other European languages too—for example French jeu du moulin and Italian mulino—forming a whole family of “mill” names for the same game across the continent. 

In historical Arabic sources, mill games (the family that includes Nine Men’s Morris) are most often referred to as qirq (قرق), a loanword that went on to become Spanish alquerque. Later Arabic lexicographers also use the term suddar (سُدَّر), which they explicitly link to a Persian origin, from se darre (سه دره), meaning “three valleys.” In modern Arabic, one attested name for mill-type games is ʾidrīs (ادريس), which can cover Nine Men’s Morris and closely related abstract games. On the Persian side, historical dictionaries record several related forms derived from that same “three valleys” expression, such as se darre and variant Arabic renderings like sih barahun and sidrah, reflecting how the name was adapted across languages in the region.
The western world thought the Chinese called the game Yih —written as “弈” (Yì)— however that was never the case. Yih is really just an ancient, broad term for playing board games, mostly referring to Go. Early scholars just got their wires crossed because they weren't too familiar with the Chinese linguistic context.2 The names Chinese players actually use for Nine Men’s Morris are far more straightforward—and, frankly, much more colorful in translation. The common modern name is “九子棋” (Jiǔzǐqí), meaning “Nine-piece game.” Others highlight the action and objective of the game itself: “成三棋” (Chéngsānqí), or “Forming-three game,” and “打三棋” (Dǎsānqí), “Hitting-three game,” which makes it sound almost like a lively skirmish. A particularly rhythmic variation, “三三棋” (Sānsānqí), translates to “Three-three game.” In some southern regions, such as Fujian and Taiwan, players strip it down to pure simplicity, calling it “直棋” (Zhíqí), meaning “Straight game”—an elegant nod to the objective of forming clean, unbroken lines.
Merels is the Middle English plural of merel, or counter. This comes from the Middle French marel, from the Old French marele for ‘counter’, according to the Mirriam Webster dictionary. This may come from the Latin marellus.

The abundant names by which it is known and its adaption in various countries and historical periods reflect its widespread popularity and addictive nature through-out time.
The name ‘Mills’ is not likely due to the shape of the board being like a modern mill as some suggest but is perhaps due to a family’s millstone having been used for the game. Upon the realisation that the prevalence of Merels boards being carved on stone may have carried a significant meaning to the people who played the game from the beginning, one sees the frequency of Merels gameboards carved into walls and onto horizontal stone boards throughout antiquity in a new light. In contrast, despite it’s modern popularity, Chess boards are not found carved into walls throughout the world.
1.1 Nine Men’s Morris in Early Literature
One of the earliest known references to the game appears in Ovid’s Ars Amatoria (Book III, c. 8 CE). Following his discussion of latrones (a popular board game of the time), Ovid describes another game divided into twelve parts—one for each month of the year—in which each side has three pieces. The objective, he explains, is to align all pieces in a straight line. Ovid wrote:
“There is another game divided into as many parts as there are months in the year. A table has three pieces on either side; the winner must get all the pieces in a straight line. It is a bad thing for a woman not to know how to play, for love often comes into being during play.”
Another reference to the Nine Men’s Morris game in literature is found in the Rule of the Knights Templar, also known as "Regula commilitonum Christi" which was written in the year 1128, after the Knights Templar had been in their headquarters on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem for ten years. This rule book governed the various aspects of Templar life, outlining required behaviour in relation to personal conduct, prayer, and battle. Perhaps surprisingly, the Rule of the Knights Templar forbids a member from playing “…no other game except Marelles, which each may play if he wishes for pleasure…” (Rosser & Boas, 2006). This may explain the many Merels boards carved into Templar and Hospitaller castles in the Holy Land. The Knights Templar were explicitly prohibited from playing “chess, backgammon or eschacons3”.

“And let it be known that a brother of the Temple should play no other game except marelles, which each may play if he wishes, for pleasure without placing wagers. No brother should play chess, backgammon, or eschaçons [an unknown game]“
The game of Nine Men’s Morris also appears in a book from the 12th century. Etched into the top wooden cover of a mid-12th century German liturgical psalter and calendar is a Nine Men’s Morris board, discovered by chance while the manuscript known as MS. Lat. liturg. d. 38 was being prepared for digitalisation (Barret, 2021)4. 
Merels is next described in a 13th century Spanish treatise on games named along with a description of the rules, with a variation that included dice at some point in the game. The book "Libro de los juegos" otherwise known as King Alfonso’s “Book of Games” contains several images such as the one in Figure 1 of pikemen and knaves playing Nine Men’s Morris (Richter, 2023). 

Figure 1: A 13th century treatise "Libro de los juegos" (Spanish: "Book of games") contains a depiction of the game Merrills being played with dice (image licenced under Wikimedia Commons)

Merels also appears in a compendium titled ‘Bonus Socius’ and ‘Civus Bononiae’ assembled or written in the second half of the thirteenth century, which contains solvable problems for Chess and Merels, for betting and teaching (Caflisch, 2018)5. 
In the 14th century, Nine Men’s Morris appears in "De Remediis utriusque Fortunae", or “Remedies for Fortunes”, a compendium of 254 Latin Dialogues written by Francesco Petrarca between 1343 and 1366. In the book, there is a woodcut illustration of people playing Chess, Backgammon and Merels. Merels also appears in an image from the “Romance of Alexander” produced from 1388-1344 (Grise, 1338)6. 
Nine Men’s Morris also makes an appearance in the al-Qamūs al-Muḥīṭ dictionary, “The Surrounding Ocean”, published in the beginning of the 15th century. In this manuscript, the Merels board with diagonals is shown and is the only drawing (Pollard, 2024)7. 
The name ‘Nine Men’s Morris’ is first noted in Shakespeare’s 1594 play, A Midsummer Night’s Dream (Act 2, Scene 1), where the character Titania says,
 “The nine men’s morris is filled up with mud”.
The poet Michael Drayton also mentions Merrills in his 15,000-line poem written between 1598 and 1622, named Poly-Olbion (Drayton, 1961), where he writes,
	“The unhappy wags which let their cattle stray,
	At nine-holes on heath while they together play”.
In China the game is mentioned in “Five Assorted Offerings”, a book written by Ming Dynasty Author Xiè Zhàozhè who lived from 1567 to 1624 (Wu & Sebillaud, 2020). 
In 1699, a William Garrett and Edward Christian were accosted in front of their Church on the Isle of Man for “Makeing Nine-Holes with their knives upon Sunday after evening prayer.” (RakingLight, n.d.), with the occurrence being recorded in the Journal of the Isle of Man Museum.
The above is not an exhaustive accounting of Nine Men’s Morris in Literature but shows that Nine Men’s Morris was well known throughout the world. However, Nine Men’s Morris existed for a millennia before its first mention in literature.

1.2 Nine Men’s Morris on Stone and Wood
The game Nine Men’s Morris was played almost everywhere in Eurasia, beginning in Ancient Rome, and spreading across the globe. The game board is inscribed on steps and benches throughout the world. There are many Merels boards distributed amongst 20 non-European nations, and 23 European ones. A census was tabulated including over 2500 examples of boards, with Italy ultimately having the greatest collection (Uberti, 2012). 
Nine Men’s Morris appears to have enjoyed great popularity during the Roman era, with Merels boards located in many regions in modern day Syria, Eastern Turkey and Rome itself (Berger, 2004) (Berger, 1999). Merels game boards have been found in the excavations of the city of Troy, on stone steps in Ceylon in Sri Lanka (in the first century A.D.) where it was called Navakankari, which is Sanskrit for ‘nine pebbles’. A Merels board was also graffitied onto the roof of a temple of Kurna in Egypt (Tame The Board Game, 2017). 
Some sources claim this etching gives seniority of Merels to Chess, but the presence of other Christian etchings nearby casts doubt and suggests the board was carved much later than the temple was built. Additionally, the game board has been found in Bronze Age gravesites in Ireland (Murray, 1913), and in ca. 900 AD Viking burial ships and tables (Goddard, 1993) (Bell, 1969). One such board carved into the stone in Rocca San Silvestro, a fortified village in Italy, can be seen in Figure 2 below.
Figure 2: Nine Men’s Morris board carved into a paving stone in Roman fortified village, Italy.
"File:Rocca San Silvestro Nine Men's Morris board.JPG" by LepoRello is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
As was already shown from investigating the literature, Nine Men’s Morris enjoyed widespread popularity during the Middle Ages, particularly with priests and monks. Unsurprisingly then the Merels board is found inscribed on benches in cloisters of many medieval churches such as Canterbury and Salisbury Cathedrals in England, and other cathedrals in Scotland and beyond. (Jaunting Jen, 2024). Merels boards are also found in cloisters at Westminster Abbey and Gloucester (Hall, 2005). The image below, Figure 3 shows a Merels board carved into the stone at the Church of St John the Baptist, East Markham, Nottinghamshire, in England.

Figure 3: "Nine Men’s Morris board carved into stone in a Nottinghamshire church.

"Church of St John the Baptist, East Markham" by Alan Murray-Rust is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.
Charles the Great, aka Charlemagne who was recognised as Emperor of Western Europe, had a throne with a Merels board inscribed upon it, perhaps by bored Roman soldiers when the stone was being utilised for its initial purpose as a section of flooring. The throne and the Merels board inscription are still on display at Aachen Cathedral, where 32 Holy Roman Emperors were coronated (Massiot, 2017)8. 
1.3 All Four Corners (of the Globe)
From a study by Wu and Sebillaud (2020) it can be found that in addition to enjoying a period of great interest in Europe during the Middle Ages, Merels has also been played throughout China, having been imported along the Silk Road from the 9th to the 13th centuries and carved into discarded architectural materials and horizontal stones in mountainous areas. Merels is also believed to have been imported to Russia from the Middle East via Central Asia, by Sogdian merchants (Erdingbat, 2012). A Merels board hidden inside a 13th century Vyborg castle in Russia indicates that the game had arrived there by this time (The Moscow Times, 2018).
Sogdian merchants were known for dealing in prized goods along the Silk Road, connecting disparate regions and transferring goods and ideas across vast distances, and were primarily followers of Mazdeism, practicing a form of Zoroastrianism from Persia9. 
Southern Africa was introduced to Merels under the name of Morabaraba which was introduced by Eugène Casalis, a Protestant missionary from France around 1832 (Mkele, 1956). A poll conducted in 1996 showed that 60% of the population of South Africa had played the game, which was so popular, references to it were included in the songs sung by mine workers (Pollard, 2024). In South Africa the game board has diagonal lines and 12 pieces, but as it is still otherwise the Merels board and rules, it has been included here. 
Today the game continues to enjoy worldwide support, with mobile apps and web-based games drawing players from around the globe. For instance, an hourly recording of users’ countries over a 24-hour period indicates that Nine Men’s Morris is played in at least 100 countries, by people speaking over 60 different languages. The largest percentage of Mills users were Persian speakers from Iran and Afghanistan, followed by German, Hindi, Turkish, and English speakers. The 17 top percentages and the corresponding languages are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: The percentage of Mills players by official language of the user's country over a 24-hour period, as indicated by hourly snapshots of online app users, February 2024.

Nine Men’s Morris’ popularity in Europe sees it played at festivals, fairs, and markets as well as in town squares such as in the figure below from Visp, in Switzerland, seen in Figure 5 where two players are using a large board painted onto the ground next to a seating area.

Figure 5: Men playing Nine Men's Morris in Berne at the Bärenplatz (Place of Baers), Switzerland, 2017. On the left is GM Otto Blaser, the first chairman of the Bernese merrils club, with Markus Schaub on the right. The building in the far background is the Swiss Parliament House.

"Time to play - Flickr - danielsteuri" by Daniel Steuri from Visp, Switzerland is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
In addition, Nine Men’s Morris has been the subject of rigorous mathematical study and has been the topic of heuristics and deep learning AI investigations, with over 30 GitHub repositories that use self-learning neural networks and other AI processes. These programs are written in a variety of languages including python, C++ and Javascript. (Gasser, 1996) (Chesani, 2018) (GitHub, 2024). 
So, Merels reached the farthest corners of Eurasia and finally Africa, then in modern times has reached all four corners of the globe.  However, the origin of the game can be traced to the earliest stone boards which were found in Roman occupied Syria (Wu & Sebillaud, 2020).
2. Modern history
In the broader European context, the 20th century brought both decline and selective revival. By the early 1900s, intellectually prestigious games such as chess and, later, modern proprietary titles began to eclipse nine men’s morris in cafés and parlours, and in many countries it came to be remembered as something played by soldiers, shepherds or monks in earlier times. During the First World War, however, improvised versions of the game (sometimes under variant names like “Trencho”10) were reportedly popular among British and French troops in the trenches because the board could be scratched into any surface.
From the late 20th century onward there has been a modest renaissance driven by historical‑reconstruction groups, museums and hobbyists, who now present Mühle/merels as part of medieval European material culture, publish rules online, and use it in educational programs about ancient and medieval games. One such game box is seen on the next page in Figure 6.
Organised competitive play in nine men’s morris has been relatively modest in most of the world, but there were some structured English events in England and Europe the late 20th century. The World Merrills Association ran an annual “World Merrills Championships” at Ryedale Folk Museum in Hutton‑le‑Hole, North Yorkshire, until the late 1990s, drawing enthusiasts from around Britain and occasionally abroad.


Figure 6: A Nine Men's Morris game.
"Nine Men's Morris" by AMagill is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
A sustained European Championship circuit for Mühle has existed since at least 2006, with annual events held almost 
entirely in southern Germany. Early championships took place in Passau (2006–2008), then moved to venues such as Chiemsee (2009) and Neufahrn near Freising/Munich (2010–2016), indicating that Bavaria and neighbouring regions became the organisational centre of European over‑the‑board play. Parallel to this, the Bayerwaldcup series (documented for 2011, 2012, 2015) anchored a regional tournament tradition in the Bavarian Forest area around Haselbach and Neukirchen, reinforcing a  local competitive scene that fed into the European events.
On the software side, modern computer analysis has had a major impact on high‑level play and the emergence of de‑facto “grandmasters.” In 2009 Peter Stahlhacke’s Mühle‑DB, a home version of the MrData endgame database, gave strong players an exhaustive analytical tool that could classify any position as won, lost or drawn, and was described on https://muehlespieler.de/ as the best aid for advancing to the top. This site was developed by Dr. Rainer Rosenberger, and is currently maintained by Christian Spiller, a fellow Mills enthusiast and avid Mills thought-puzzle maker. The page has some exercises which may be of interest for some readers, and is worth taking a look at as much work has gone into it..

This was followed in 2013 by Brillant Mill, a playing program built on a full database, which continues to be developed. Brillant Mill was created by a four‑person Hungarian team: Alexander Szabari, Jozef Mičko, Ferenc Volman and György Bándy. Szabari initiated the project and handled programming together with Mičko, while Volman and Bándy contributed their long‑standing practical expertise as very strong Mühle players. 
In 2015 the free program Malom extended database‑backed play and analysis to several Mills variants (Standard, Lasker Mühle, Morabaraba), while strong non‑table-base engines such as Master 2.3 and other titles like 3D‑Mühle Prof further broadened access to the game and assisted with it’s development strategically. Together, these tools have raised the theoretical ceiling of the game and shaped the preparation practices of leading European players.
Many papers have been written on the game, including the one written by G. E. Gévay and G. Danner on “Calculating Ultrastrong and Extended Solutions for Nine Men’s Morris, Morabaraba, and Lasker Morris”, which is mentioned on the website with QR code below11 concerning their program, Malom. This program is discussed later in this book under Resources.
Since the early 2000s, nine men’s morris has quietly re‑established itself as a readily available “heritage” game in both physical and digital form. Commercial producers in Britain, Germany and Italy sell dedicated mills sets and combined boards (often paired with draughts or other games) through specialist retailers and museum shops, typically with multilingual rule booklets pitched at families and tourists. The game also appears in design‑forward editions such as Printworks’ wooden “Classic” series and in numerous handmade or leather travel versions sold through craft marketplaces like Etsy.
In the modern day, in countries like Switzerland, the game and rules can be found on one of the tables in the family area of the BLS “Kambly train,” which runs in Switzerland between Bern, Trubschachen (Emmental) and Lucerne, shown here in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Photos from Bern, Switzerland, posted to Nine Men's Morris Facebook group by Markus Schaub, world title holder in 1995 at the World Championship held in Hutton-le-Hole, Ryedale Folk Museum, in the UK.
Additionally, the game still finds acceptance at churches around the world, with merrils boards being painted on the ground at some such as the Reformed Church in Bern-Bethlehem in  Figure 8 below, and in many other places.
It is a dream of this author to travel the globe visiting places where ancient and modern hands cave carved or drawn mills boards into footpaths, stones, and featured them in building walls and Emperor’s thrones. There’s something romantic and inspiring about a game that elicits such mystery and passion. But more on that later..
Figure 8: Completely new in front of the Reformed Church in Bern-Bethlehem - posted by Markus Schaub in the German FB group Mühlespielfreunde.

2.1 Masters of Mills
The Welt-Mühlespiel-Dachverband (WMD) regulates Nine Men's Morris (Mühle) world championships, titles like Großmeister (GM) and Meister (MM), as well as Mills tournaments. Much like in Chess, there are strict requirements for becoming a grand master or master of Mills. Grand Mastership (GM) requires 20 tournament wins or norm points while a Mills Mastership (MM) requires 15 podium finishes. 
In 2008, there were 4 GMs (e.g., Markus Schaub, Alain Flury, Manfred Nüscheler, and Adrian Wenger, all from Switzerland) and 20 MMs. The Switzerland players dominated international tournaments from the 1980s to early 2010s, with Markus Schaub, a Mills enthusiast and well known and loved personage in the Mills community12 leading from 1982-1992, and there were early UK players like Andy Fawbert (4 world titles, 1987-1997).

A current list of Grand Masters is reproduced below, from WMD, which lists all 11 Grand Masters. The list can be found in the appendix of this book.

2024 GM List
    • Manfred Nüscheler (CH, Feb 1993)
    • Hans Schürmann (CH, Feb 1993)
    • Markus Schaub (CH, Nov 1993)
    • Adrian Wenger (CH, Apr 1996)
    • Alain Flury (CH, Mar 1999)
    • Daniel Lehner (CH, Jan 2020)
    • Franz Schmid (CH, May 2020)
    • György Bándy13 (H, May 2020)
    • Karl-Heinz Andraschko (D, May 2020)
    • Richard Fischer (CH, May 2020)
    • Ferenc Volman (H, Nov 2024)

A site by the GM from Hungary, György Bándy, who earned GM status in 2020 via WMD is on the previous page. Some of the links on the site no longer work as of publishing but there is some dated information concerning past GM’s and MM’s which the reader may find interesting.

The other site in the footer outlines some of the passion of Markus Schaub and his commitment to the game from 1977 which may also be visited.

The latest Mills GM is Ferenc Volman, a leading Nine Men’s Morris specialist from Hungary who is widely regarded as a top‑level “grandmaster‑strength” player and theorist of the game. He is one of four core members of the Brillant Mill team, which developed the Brillant Mill database/engine for Nine Men’s Morris analysis, along with György Bándy and two programmers and mills enthusiasts Alexander Szabari and Jozef Mičko.

There are over 40 MM’s as of 2024; from early ones like Robert Abbühl, Franz Beyeler, Otto Blaser (all CH, Feb 1995), the British group (Fawbert, Michael Sunley, Anthony Eddon, Raymond Thompson, Eric Weldon; all GB, Feb 1995), to recent additions like Simon Erni (May 2024), Csaba Orbán/Elemér Sánta (ROU, Dec 2023), Roman Korn/Erwin Zimmermann (D, Dec 2023)
Further details of the MM’s are included in the appendix of this book, and the WMD website itself can be found at http://muehlespiel.ch/wmd.  The listed page in particular is where several texts can be found under; WMD → Textbooks, and other pages contain photos taken from the tournaments, reports, results and other information from the European and Swiss championships and annual rankings.



Figure 9: muehlespiel webpage

Among the textbooks on the website is the 124 page German booklet that completely sold out in 1980 and is called,  “So gewinnt man Mühle” (This is how you win at Nine Men’s Morris.), written by Hans Schürmann and Manfred Nüscheler, pictured below in Figure 10.

Figure 10: Hans Schürmann, Markus Schaub and Manfred Nüscheler,

Sadly, Hans Schürmann, and Manfred Nüscheler have passed away, but the community of Nine Men’s Morris still benefits from the presence and knowledge of Markus Schaub.

2.2 Switzerland (1935, 1974 – 1984)
The true modern revival of Nine Men’s Morris began in the 1930’s with a tournament held in Emmenbrücke, Switzerland where the tournament winner was Hans Schürmann, from a competition which had 500 entrants. From there, a lull in registered events continued until 1974 with a championship organised by the Club Charret Granges-Marnand, in Marnand, Glovelier, Urdorf with 1000 entrants, and also in Lucerne, from which event there are no surviving records.

In 1979, there was the start of the MVB (Mühlespiel Verein Bern) tournament activities with 7 tournaments per year. From 1980 – 1987, the travelling trophy tournament continued in Bern at the Restaurant Waldhorn. Switzerland hosted several more tournaments including one in 1984 which was interrupted by perfect skiing weather, whereby the 300 expected entrants were reduced to 164. The event was held in Obersaxen, Grison county and appeared in the Bunder Zeitung newspaper article (with Google translation) below.


Figure 10a The translated news article for the event in Obersaxon.

From 1987 to 1997, Tournaments were mainly held in a small village in Hutton-le-hole in York, England, which is the subject of the next chapter. Other tournaments continued in Switzerland, in particularly in Lenk, where the European and Swiss championships continue to this day, excepting a break during 2020/21 due to Covid.

2.3 Hutton-le-Hole (1987 - 1997)
Hutton-le-hole is a small village with 29 buildings dating from the late 18th century in North Yorkshire, England. It is a picturesque spot in the North York Moors National Park, known for its stream-crossed green, thatched cottages, and historic charm. The village dates to the Domesday Book as "Hoton" (meaning "place near the hollow"), with Quaker history from the 1600s. Today it's a tourist draw for walkers, picnickers, and its sheep-roaming streets.
The village's Ryedale Folk Museum seen below in Figure 11 in a photo from 1995 prominently displays Merrills boards, pegs, and artifacts carved into stones—evidence of the game's medieval popularity in the North York Moors, where such boards were etched by locals, masons, or churchgoers.

Figure 11: Ryedale Folk Museum - 1995
Some of the Merrils boards that were on display in 1995 in the museum are shown below in Figure 12.











Figure 12: Merrils boards on display at Hutton-le-Hole
Hutton-le-Hole hosted the World Nine Men's Morris Championships annually at Ryedale Folk Museum from 1987 until 1997, spotlighting the ancient strategy game (also called Merrills) and fuelling its modern revival through the tournaments, displays, and the camaraderie of the event.

Nine Mens’s Morris has a rich history in the area, even appearing on the side of what looks like an old church, which in 1995 was being used as a kiosk.


Figure 13: What looks like a church with a Nine Men's Morris board and figures on the exterior was in fact a kiosk. Image from https://www.markus-schaub.ch/ with permission.

From 1978 to 1994, English players were the only winners. In 1995 – 1997, Swiss players from the Muhlespielverein Bern (which was founded in 1978) were the winners of the tournaments.  First was GM Markus Schaub, then in ‘96 GM Adrian Wegner and in ‘97 MM Franz Beyeler. 

The competition was a major event in the area, with children taking time off school and speeches being given by the village mayor. There was participation from 15 nations, and the games were transmitted on Sky News to various Commonwealth countries, with the winners receiving beautiful Merrills boards.




 


Figure 13b The winning board / Trophy for the World championship on the left with a gold plaque, and the board presented to the runner-up.

2.4 Germany (1999 – 2024/25)
The German tournaments include(d) national events (German Championships), recurring opens/cups (German Open, Bayerwald Cup), major internationals hosted in Germany (European Championships), and a notable organizational milestone, the founding of the German federation “Deutscher Mühlespielbund” (German Nine Men’s Morris federation). Notably, the first German champion was Ingo Sommer, in the year 2000. Germany hosted several European Championships across multiple cities (Passau, Seeon/Seebruck area, Neufahrn, Augsburg, Ravensburg) including in 2009; 2010–2019; 2021/2024/2025 — the Neukirchen v. W.: Bayerwald Cup.

The ongoing competition in  Neukirchen is held at the Hotel Maisberger in Neufahrn near Munich, and is shown below in Figure 14.

Figure 14: The European Championships were held at Hotel Maisberger in Neufahrn near Munich in 2010–2016, and again in 2024 and 2025.

2.5 Switzerland (1984 – 2025)
Switzerland continued to host the European and Swiss Championships in Lenk from 1984 onward. The Swiss Nine Men’s Morris include the 1984 Windisch/Brugg event run in three age categories. There was ongoing tournament activity centered on Bern: the MVB (Mühlespiel Verein Bern) began regular tournament operations in 1979 and, in the later period, continued Swiss Championship hosting in Switzerland across multiple venues (e.g., Bern, Charmey, Seon, and Langnau i.E. in 2023–2025).

The modern city of Bern contains many street-side Mills playing areas such as those in the images below, posted by Markus Schaub in the Facebook group Mühlespielfreunde.


Figure 15: Mills gameboard on the Mittelstrasse, next to the Zähringer-Migros in Bern.

Figure 16: Mill playground (without figures - it's summer holidays) on the courtyard of Campus Muristalden (New School of Design) on the Liebegg in Bern.
If we take a look at the countryside around Lenk, Switzerland, we immediately begin to comprehend how so many Mills tournament players are skiers, given the very beautiful and mountainous surrounds, here shown in an image of the railway station there, in Figure 17.

"Bahnhof Lenk" by JoachimKohler-HB is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Figure 17: The Lenk railway, with mountainous surrounds.

2.6. Other tournaments of note
Nine Men’s Morris has also seen a rich tournament life beyond its central hubs in Switzerland, England, and Germany. In Austria, the early 2000s were especially active: Vienna hosted the 2003 “ORF‑Austrian Open”, while Mühlbach am Hochkönig held events at the Berghotel Arthurhaus in 2003 and 2004 that attracted strong regional fields. In the Czech Republic, the game featured at the “Gedankenspiel‑Olympiade” in Prague and Pardubice in 2003 and 2004, integrating Nine Men’s Morris into a broader festival.
In Central and Eastern Europe, Hungary and Romania emerged as particularly important centres for organised play. Hungary hosted the “MMK malom kupa” in Dunaújváros in 2017, followed by the European Championship in Budapest in 2018, and then a continuous run of Hungarian national championships at Lakitelek/Hungarikum Liget from 2021 to 2025. Romania’s contribution includes the 2018 “Városi Malomverseny” in Csíkszereda, as well as the “Parázska Cup” series in Miercurea Ciuc, held in 2018 and 2019 and then annually from 2021 to 2024.

The location of the tournament in Hungary is shown in Figure 18, where the event was held in Lakitelek in 2021. 

Figure 18: Tournament in Lakitelek, Hungary, 2021
2.7 The Tournament Process
During the running of the Merrills championships, it was forbidden to take down moves, unlike in chess where it is required. However, Merrils game-sheets were available for writing moves down after games, and are shown below. On the left is the game sheet from Hutton-le-hole and on the right is the notation sheet from the Swiss championship at Lenk in 1996


  





Figure 18a Tournament notation sheets, left, from Hutton-le-Hole, right, from Lenk
Tournaments are played using game clocks such as are used in chess. 
3. Symbolism and Religious Connections
Alongside its social and competitive life represented by the many European championships and tournaments, nine men’s morris has also attracted symbolic and religious interpretations. The game’s simple geometry and triadic, nested squares have invited speculation that link it to ideas of order, balance and the structure of the cosmos. In some medieval and early modern contexts, boards carved into church benches, cloister stones and monastery walls suggest that the game’s presence overlapped with spaces of worship.
A possible symbolic meaning of the Merels board is its representation of a triple enclosure, whereby the concentric squares represent temple buildings with an inner and outer courtyard and a temple sanctuary. Solomon’s Temple in Jerusalem and its replacement described in the Christian Bible in Ezekial (Chapter 40) have this general structure. Additionally, the manuscript ‘Postilla in Bibliam’, written in the 15th century, contains a drawing very reminiscent of the Merrills board (RakingLight, n.d.).
The predominant religion in Syria at the time of Ancient Rome (where the earliest Merels boards are found) was a combination of traditional Roman Polytheism and worship of local deities. Francesca Mazzilli in his 2022 study says that the Roman soldiers in Syria were typically prominent members of the financial elite, and that these soldiers primarily commissioned inscriptions to gods associated with the army such as Mithras and Jupiter Ammon as well as imported deities such as Apollo (Mazzilli, 2022).
Mithraism, like Zoroastrianism14, comes from Persia (modern-day Iran), and was a religion somewhat like Christianity in it’s basic theology and structure. Mithra was seen as a deity and a mediator between man and the god of light, Ahura Mazda, and there are parallels with the story of Jesus Christ who redeems humanity from sin. While Jesus was born of a virgin woman, Mithra was born of the earth itself, later riding and killing a bull. Both religions involved ritual purification through water (Azimi, 2023). Mithraism became a primary god of Roman soldiers perhaps because it allowed many disparate and conquered peoples to find a commonality, but also because Mithra was honoured as the patron of loyalty to the emperor in the Roman Empire during the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE.
Interestingly, the Christian disciple Paul was said to have preached first in his native land of Syria (Galatians 1:17-24). So, perhaps it is not coincidental that we see the game being played in early Christian monasteries as well as by Roman soldiers.
Taken together with Merels being the only game allowed to be played by the Knights Templar, and the prevalence of engraved stone boards with that connection to Mithra, one wonders if Merels held a special religious significance which gave rise to its importance to scholars and priests, or whether the associations the game had with early religions and religious sects were merely coincidental. It may be possible that the prevalence of Persian speaking Mills players is suggestive of a Persian and perhaps even Mithraic or Zoroastrian beginning.  
Either way, Nine Men’s Morris is a very popular game with nine stones that may have initially been played on a millstone. It may not hold special significance beyond its existence as a greatly loved and widely enjoyed, deep-thinking strategy game, but even that alone is pretty neat.
4. The Game Itself
Speculation and conjecture regarding the origins of the game aside, Merels is a game that demands mindfulness, focus, experience, and consistent attention. Knowledge of the board and at least a basic understanding of strategy must be employed for adequate results against seasoned players. This can be achieved to a fair degree by playing over 10,000 games, like this author, or by reading a book on Nine Men’s Morris strategy15.
4.1 Naughts and Crosses
Merels can also be thought of as a battle of armies fought over four hills surrounding a valley. Or another way to think about Merels is as a 3-dimensional version of the childhood game of naughts and crosses, with the 3D space represented on a 2-dimensional plane. The naughts and crosses game is played over and over, first placed, and then later moved from square to square. 
The way to win in the game of naughts and crosses is to mark the first position in a corner square as observed in Figure 19. If the opponent does not mark a naught diagonally opposite, the next move is to do so. Then the third mark goes in a remaining diagonal position which means that no matter where the opponent next places their mark, the first player will be able to form three in a row. This is shown in Figure 19 with the placement of five marks. The position of the sixth mark does not matter, as the seventh mark will cause a winning condition.

Figure 19: The game of Naughts and Crosses, with one player's marks in blue and the other red. The first and third move forms a diagonal, the fifth move guarantees that the seventh move will form three blue marks in a row.
The basic way to score in the game of Nine Men’s Morris is to arrange three of your own pieces into a ‘mill’ or straight line. The best way to achieve this is to attempt to form two mills at the same time as in the game naughts and crosses above. This enables the player to remove one of the opponent’s pieces from the board no matter how the opponent blocks the player’s move. As has been said before, a mill can be opened and closed repeatedly, and the player is obliged to remove an opponent’s piece each time a mill is formed. To win, the player ensures their opponent can no longer field three pieces or is unable to move their own pieces.
Of course, the game is much, much more complicated than that, with many different tactical approaches, each with more or less merit depending on the position of stones on the board and the skill level of the players. 
Nine Men’s Morris has been ‘solved’ by modern mathematicians (it’s a tie if nobody makes a mistake) using a combination of 10 billion endgame solution databases; it is the first non-trivial game solved where almost the entire number of solutions must be considered (Gasser, 1996), with the usual practice of pruning of decision trees unable to be employed to lower the amount of end results. 
According to Wells in his book, “Games and Mathematics” (2012), for most versions of the game where players have an equal number of pieces, most of the starting positions are wins for the starting player16. In addition to that, Merels has been proven to be a game where one small mistake can mean an inevitable losing position (Wells, 2012). The game itself results in a lot of draw positions, even with games against poor players. Despite this, any position can be solved in at most 87 moves (Gasser, 1995).  But despite the very many varied qualities of game-play, the basic rules are less complicated than chess, so it has that going for it.
4.2 The Board
The Merels board has three concentric squares joined by vertical, diagonal, and horizontal lines, that start at the edge of the inner square and terminate on the outer square. The diagonal lines are not usually drawn in modern games, as the pieces only move along the horizontal and vertical lines.
In all, there are 24 intersections where pieces are placed and moved as shown below in Figure 20.

Figure 20: The Merrill’s board, made using Sanmill showing the grid and number of remaining pieces.
For the ease of reading the later text, please make note, positions A4 –  B4 – C4, D1 – 2 – 3, D5 – 6 – 7, and E4 – F4 – G4 are cardinal positions; B4, D2, D6, and F4 are central cardinal positions and are the positions intersecting the central square. There are three squares termed outer, centre (or middle), and inner squares.

Each line may be referred to as such, using the coordinate system; line 1 is on the bottom of the figure, and line g is the right-most vertical line.
4.3 Game Counters
The simplest game counters are pebbles, as is suggested by the meaning of Sanskrit name for Merels, Navakankari, which means nine pebbles. Game counters can be made from a wide variety of materials. Around the time that Nine Men’s Morris was being taken to South Africa in the 1800’s, game pieces like those in Figure 21 were being hand-crafted by Australian convicts and made from bone, marble, pottery, or coins, which can be seen on display at Hyde Park Museum in Sydney, and are shown below. These would have been made using the same skill-set and simple tools as those made by the Romans millennia before.

Figure 21: Gaming counters made from bone.
"Gaming Counters and Bone Fragments" by MumblerJamie is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.

4.4 Stages of Play
There are many variants of the game including one without distinct stages, but the most common involves three main phases. In stage one, pieces are placed alternately by each player. In stage two, each player alternately moves one piece to an adjacent connected and unoccupied position. In stage three, when one or both players have only three pieces remaining, they may move any piece to any unoccupied position on the board. The other player must continue moving each piece one position at a time each turn unless they too have three pieces.
4.5. Winning Conditions
The game ends on one of three conditions, when either player cannot move a piece, when either player has less than three pieces, or when the same position is recreated three times. It is acceptable for players to request a draw condition if they feel neither they nor their opponent has an advantage later in the game. 

When both players are down to their last three pieces and enter the “flying” phase, the match can really start to crawl. If they keep dodging repeated positions, it might drag on indefinitely. That’s why a lot of modern tournaments and online platforms enforce move limits—like declaring a draw after 50 moves without a capture or capping it at 10 moves once both players hit three pieces—to keep the game from wandering endlessly.
Each time a player makes a mill, which is three connected pieces in a straight line, they can remove an opponent’s piece of their choice, unless that piece is itself part of a mill. The only exception to this rule is where all the opponent’s remaining pieces are themselves part of a mill, in which case any piece may be removed. It should be noted that if two mills are formed in a single move, only one piece can be removed.
That is the sum total of the rules, which seems very simple at first glance, but these rules give rise to a complex and nuanced game which is very difficult to master.
4.6. Variations
Aside from the variation in King Alfonso’s ‘Book of Games’ which contained dice, there are variations that do not have well defined stages, instead allowing users to move or place pieces as long as they have pieces, then continue with simple movement. Other variations do not give players the opportunity to hop all over the board in the third stage, instead ending in the second stage when players are limited in movement. There is some anecdotal evidence of a variant which does not allow players to re-form the same mill twice (Board Game Geek, 2022), according to some board game forum members.

There is some anecdotal evidence of a variant in which players are not allowed to re‑form the same mill twice (Board Game Geek, 2022), as discussed by several forum members. Additional support for this idea comes from the developer of the Sanmill app, who shared an interesting account from their own experience.
After receiving a wave of negative reviews from Russian players who objected to the inclusion of repeat mills, the developer investigated the issue firsthand. By exploring locally hosted app stores—many operating independently due to sanctions—and analysing one of the leading Russian Mill apps, they confirmed that the prevailing local practice strictly forbids breaking and re‑forming the same mill.
Other variations include games that have three, six, or twelve pieces, with two or four squares as the number of pieces require. This text will concentrate on the 9-piece variation with three stages and hyper-mobile pieces in the last stage of play, as this seems to be the accepted game-play in most apps and websites available today.
4.7. Basic Rules of Play
Some placements on the board have more value to the player than others, as can be seen in Figure 22. In the second stage of play, where players can move their pieces from one position to another adjacent and unoccupied position, this is quite an important aspect of play.

Figure 22: The movement values for positions on the Merrills board, from 4 directions to 2
Referring to Figure 22, from positions B2, D2, D6, and F4, a piece can possibly be moved into four different places, giving the holder of the initial position more options and thus a greater control of the game outcome. Generally17, if a player does not hold at least one of these central cardinal positions at the start of stage two, they are unlikely to win. Importantly, a mill that contains one of these positions, aligned with the cardinal lines of North (line d(5,6,7)), South (line d(1,2,3)), East (line 4(e,f,g)) or West (line 4(1,2,3)), is more valuable than one that does not, and an opponent generally should not be allowed to make a such a mill in the opening stage. Although, there are exceptions which we see later in the book.
Secondary to those positions are those with three movement options: A4, C4, D1, D3, D5, D7, E4, and G4. The rest of the positions have only two potential movement options. However, the most advantageous move that can be made at any time during a game depends on the arrangement of other pieces on the board and may not be related to the movement potential of the piece’s place on the board. 
As will be discussed later, this movement potential of different places on the Merels board is no longer relevant to a player who is only fielding three pieces in an end-stage game. In this situation, the rules change for that player; we will discuss the ramifications of this at length.
5. Gameplay
5.1. How to win
There are essentially two ways to win when playing Nine Men’s Morris. The first way is to remove your opponent’s pieces and the second is to remove the ability of your opponent to move their own pieces. A typical approach will employ both techniques, with the final victory being achieved ultimately by one or the other methods, to take advantage of the situation as it develops.

Victory goes to the first player to restrict the ability of the opponent to move pieces, or to reduce the opponent to two pieces.
5.2. Common Mistakes
A common mistake made by beginners is to attempt to make mills too early in stage one of the game during placement. This is rarely a winning strategy against a good opponent, as the player will often end up blocking themselves from movement in the second stage, or even during placement. It requires a very good memory and study of the game in many branching possibilities to routinely win or draw while making successive mills. It will be covered later, but for now we proceed with the assumption that it is a bad idea.
Indeed, it is quite possible to trap beginners (and sometimes more seasoned players) who attempt this and in so doing, win in the first stage of play with the opponent unable to make a first move. This will be seen in principle in game one.
Players also commonly decide to block a piece once, then when it moves, continue blocking it even when there were better moves on the board, in what appears to be some kind of cognitive bias. If the player has time, they may benefit from reconsidering a move once initially decided, especially if it is similar to a past move.
The most ill-advised mistake, often made and largely due to the aforementioned cognitive bias, is to pass on a chance to regain initiative in the game, meaning directing the placement of pieces by the opposition. This will be discussed at length through the text.
Other common mistakes include losing concentration in a longer game and moving your mobile blocking piece, which is keeping the opponent from making a mill, further away from the partial mill than the opponent’s piece as in Figure 23. 

Figure 23: White's lower left piece is stopping black's upper piece from forming a mill.
If there is more going on on the board, black may forget that the lower left piece was stopping white from forming a mill on the left cardinal intersection at line 4, which would be made with the addition of the topmost piece at d7. If the lower white piece moves to the right, black will be able to move counterclockwise around the outer square to make the mill, enabling them to remove a white piece. 
Yet another mistake made by a beginner is when they move a piece simply because they are tired of repeating the same moves against a more patient player. A more patient player is best kept in a draw position if there is no obvious advantage to be gained, and moving a piece for the want of doing something different can be exactly what the opponent was waiting for. A draw is often considered a good result, especially against a better player.

5.3. Where to play
Whilst regional games may be available in your area, there are several apps that can be downloaded for either iPhone or Android that allow users to play against other people from all over the world. Some apps and websites give users an Elo score, which increases or decreases per won or lost game, depending on the Elo of the opponent. Elo is not an acronym, instead being the last name of the system’s inventor, Alfred Elo.
The Elo rating system is a way of calculating the relative skill of players. It was originally invented to track the relative skill of chess players but is used in a variety of different competitive sports. After each game, the winner takes points from the loser, with the amount being decided by the difference in the ratings between players. Hence if a player with a high Elo loses to a player with a much lower Elo, they will lose a lot of their standing. It is of little benefit for the high-rating player to win (or play at all) against a low-rated player. Likewise, the best way to increase one’s own Elo is to play higher-rated players.
There is also the world championships and tournaments for Nine Men’s Morris, with world rankings and a list of Mills Masters. The tournaments have been held regularly with the 26th Championship held in 2024, using a rule set that has been translated into 14 languages. Playing at these tournaments involves a MElo score which works the same way. (World Mill Game umbrella organization, 2023).
There may even be a Merrils club near you, like the Swiss Merrils club, founded in 1974 and named Charret-Club Marnand. They have a website at www.marnand.com/charret. The website contains many photos from club meetings and contact details.

The club Merrils Friends of Fluhli (Muhlespielfruende Fluhli) has organised a few Swiss championships, but does not have a homepage to share.

5.4 Quick games
Mills apps;

Mills
Two of the best-known apps include the mills game from DonkeyCat available at mobile device app stores. It has paid and subscription options and allows players 30 seconds for each move – with a reserve 30 seconds which is used up.
Games are not recorded, but players are assigned a MElo score, so you know where you sit in the scheme of things, and can see if your game-play is improving over time as seen in Figure 24.


Figure 24: A screenshot of the author's rating in the Mills app during strategy tests.
Align it
Align it is another short game provider for both 12 and 9 Men’s Morris. It allows up to a minute for each move, and games can be reviewed at the end of the play.
                            
Figure 25: Align-it app menu screen and Align-it's match screen after a draw.
5.5. Online games
Many more experienced players, including current and previous Grand Masters can be found at playok.com/en/mill/ where online games can be played as can be seen in Figure 25a.
Games, including the games of others, can be re-played. This can be a great learning resource! Games are timed, with options for 1 to 30 minutes for each turn. 

The developer of Sanmill has implemented support for importing move lists directly from PlayOK. This means players can export their game data from PlayOK, load it into Sanmill, and run a detailed post‑game analysis to pinpoint exactly where they—or even top‑level players—made mistakes. It’s a powerful feature that elevates the learning experience to an entirely new level.
Figure 25a A mills game being started on PlayOK

5.6. Long games
A great resource for games with turns of up to 3 days each, is the website brettspielnetz shown in Figure 26. This site is in German but can be translated using google translate. 
Figure 26 The Brettspielnetz site hosts tournaments and longer timed games

https://www.brettspielnetz.de/muehle/muehle.php
Yow will be assigned a MElo score here as well, and can be a part of regular tournaments against some tough players. The scoring system here seems to be a little higher or more easily earnt than the app mills.
6. Resources
6.1. Sanmill
A must have app (in this author’s opinion) is Sanmill. Sanmill allows for playing many variants of Mills. This AI - driven opponent and 2 person offline player app makes sharing games easy, as well as allowing the creation of images of games with notations. The ability to play others online is there but not through a server.
The app is highly customisable visually and in terms of the inner AI mechanics, with a vast array of configurable options including being able to view your game statistics and being able to create and share puzzle games. A note to new Sanmill users; swipe from the left side of the screen and select settings to adjust the appearance, including adding numbers on the pieces, changing the board and pieces, and adding the annotations toolbar. There is also an advantage graph, and many other features which can be selected in the settings.
The game can be found on the app store, for android devices and on apple’s App Store. In addition to iOS and Android, Sanmill is also available for desktop users through the Microsoft Store (look for “Mill (N Men’s Morris)”), Linux (via Snapcraft “Mill | N Mens Morris”), and the Mac App Store. Just look for either of the two game icons below in Figure 27, and ensure the app has been posted by Calcitem Studio.

The developer has also included a playful Easter egg worth mentioning: the Sanmill app icon changes depending on the user’s region. In countries where the twelve‑piece variant is especially popular—such as Iran, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, South Korea, and Taiwan—the icon displays a board with diagonal lines. In all other regions, it shows the classic board without them.
So, if players see either version of the icon, they can rest assured they’ve found the right app.



 



Figure 27 The Sanmill app icons to look for.

When it comes to deep analysis with full endgame databases, the desktop version of Sanmill is generally the best option. According to the developer, Sanmill is specifically designed to read databases from G. E. Gévay and G. Danner’s “Malom” program—the same resource referenced a little later in this book. Other formats, such as those from Brilliant Mill or Jochen Hoenicke’s site (muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de), aren’t compatible. For mobile devices, limited storage means only a partial segment of the Malom database can usually be used. However, players with high‑capacity phones (85 GB or more) can still load the complete set if they wish.
It’s also worth noting that the Android version receives updates first. For readers eager to test the latest experimental features, the developer offers an open Beta track accessible through the Google Play Store.
Importantly, games in this book are presented as QR codes and can easily be scanned and imported as text into the app and replayed move by move. Simply open the Sanmill app, select Move from the bottom menu as seen in Figure 28, then press on the ellipsis in the top right corner of the Move list window, and select Scan QR code from the drop-down menu.
                                     
Figure 28 The Sanmill app with QR code support.

6.2. The perfect database
The perfect database can be accessed at the website to follow, and games can be entered in one move at a time and analysed for mistakes and to improve your game. It is an invaluable resource and is well recommended.
https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/





Figure 29: The perfect database link

6.3. WMD - texts
As previously mentioned, there are several resources and texts available at the WMD website indicated below, including the text, “So gewinnt man Mühle” (This is how you win at Nine Men’s Morris.), written by Hans Schürmann, and Manfred Nüscheler, written in German. The text “It is decided: The Game of Nine Men’s Morris is a draw” by R. Gasser and J. Nievergelt is also hosted at the below web address.

 http://muehlespiel.ch/wmd
6.4. Mühle Lehrbuch
There is a good guide on Mills (unfortunately also only in German) written by Dr. Rainer Rosenberger at the following link. 




https://muehlespieler.de/download/muehle_lehrbuch.pdf
Mühle-Lehrbuch is a systematically structured strategy manual aimed at players who already know the rules of Nine Men’s Morris and want to deepen their understanding of the game. The guide discusses the basic notations and mill types, then goes on to describe the Z mill and it’s theory, which Rosenberger analyzes in depth through opening variants and systematic position studies up to the sixth white stone, distinguishing lines that are theoretically drawn from those that are lost for one side.  
In contrast, this book investigates two of the possible Z mill variants but in much greater detail.

6.5. Brilliant Mill
Brillant Mill is a professional database-driven software program for Nine Men's Morris (Mühlespiel), developed by a team including programmers Alexander Szabari and Jozef Mičko from Košice, Slovakia, plus experts Ferenc Volman and György Bándy from Hungary.
It contains a complete database of all possible game positions (total unpacked size ~21 GB), and users can analyze any position for status (win/loss/draw), paths to endgame (up to 204 moves in longest win), error detection, and auto/manual scans; the software generates positions like 3 vs. 9 draws.
A 16-day/45-use demo is free via www.brillant-mill.eu



6.6. Malom Strategy
The 2024 text “MALOMSTRATÉGIA – CSIKI-CSUKI ÉS A TÖBBIEK” by  Gábor Takács, which was supported by the Hungarian  Ministry of Culture and Innovation and reviewed by Ferenc Volman and Ádám Gángó contains in-depth strategy. Books were presented to participating players at the national Mills Championship.

6.7. Malom
Malom is a powerful tool for Nine Men's Morris, developed by Gábor Danner and Gábor E. Gévay, and hosted at the University of Szeged18 . Available as version 1.1.0 for 64-bit Windows (requiring .NET 4.5), it has very large databases downloadable via BitTorrent that enables perfect play, extended analyses from non-standard positions, and precise depth-to-win calculations across standard Nine Men's Morris.
With Malom, users can load databases for interactive games, set up free positions, or fall back on a heuristic AI when needed. Its source code, release notes, and the accompanying 2016 IEEE paper by Gévay, G. E., & Danner, G. (2016) explain the multi-valued retrograde analysis powering these feats.

Next, we will get back to the game, and look at how a beginner often approaches an attempted win.

7. Some Games
Through-out this book, many ideas are presented to the reader through games. The QR code imports for Sanmill make an otherwise quite tedious process of attempting to follow the presented moves quite pleasant. So we hope you downloaded the Sanmill app and have it on hand on a separate device to this e-reader, PC or tablet that you are reading from. That said, let us continue!

Most beginners attempt to play Nine Men’s Morris as if it were a game of tic tac toe. This seems to be done in the belief that if one can place a piece at diagonals of the outer or inner squares (ignoring the four centre cardinal points due to inexperience), then one can attempt to make as many mills as possible and win the game. This is shown in Figure 30, where the black player attempts to create a condition like the winning move discussed earlier for naughts and crosses. Unless white places his next piece in a7, black will place there, enabling them to form a mill by placing their next piece at either a1 or g7, as white will be unable to stop them.
















 Figure 30: The opening moves of a mills game where black attempts to form a mill on the outer square. White has next turn.
Alternatively, a player may attempt the same thing from diagonal positions as shown in later in Figure 33 or several other figurations which will be covered. With this strategy, whether the player attempts to form mills in the outer or the inner ring using diagonal points or cardinal points, they will usually lose against a good player. In the game above unless white places their next piece at B2 or B6 (prompting black to place at B6 or B2 to stop white from forming a mill on their next move), black can form their mill by first placing in A7 then either A1 or G7.
From game one to game five that follow, game openings will be studied, in part to show the reader why experienced players usually start at the central cardinal positions, and to discuss how to respond if an opponent attempts one of these more basic opening plays. For the convenience of the reader who may find the figure descriptions using the board grid difficult to follow, several of the games are available as videos and QR codes that can be imported into Sanmill. It is recommended that the reader watches the videos by using the link or loads the game from the QR-codes and then returns to the book for these games, as the video descriptions are less detailed. Further games are not presented as videos. As a point of interest, this author prepared several played game descriptions not included in this book, which are also available on Youtube, as in Figure 30a.










Figure 30a additional games described by the author are available on YouTube.

The more experienced player can skip ahead to 7.2 Common starting positions or 8.1 Protecting open mills or even Part 2 of the book, but may also enjoy the game descriptions following.

7.1 Game One
In stage one play, for the following figures, the sequence of moves in the played games is denoted by the numbers on the pieces; number one is placed first, and players alternate placement until black places piece 18 and stage two begins. Where games shown in this text include stage two, the movements will be described using the piece numbers and the grid positions. 
Additionally, to assist the reader games one to three have accompanying videos which show the movements between figures. These videos can be viewed by following the provided links, starting with the following link for game one shown from Figure 31. The Sanmill link can be found in Figure 32.

 Figure 31: Youtube channel link for game one.
https://youtu.be/OcHeUXJrBwU


Figure 32: Game 1 moves for Sanmill import

Figure 33: White makes opening moves at C5 and E3, and black chooses not to try to stop them forming a mill
Here we will explore the extreme situation of an opponent forming three mills in the opening game and investigate why it can be a poor strategy to form so many mills in stage one of play. Whether black attempts using diagonals or cardinal points in either the inner square or outer square to form repeated mills, the outcome can be similar to the what is shown in Figure 33 to Figure 37. The player forming multiple mills can end up blocking themselves and being surrounded by the opponent.
Consider for example the case in Figure 34 where the game in Figure 33 continues. The white player can now remove one of black’s pieces. In this case let’s say they remove piece number 6 at C4.

Figure 34: The formation of a mill on the right-hand side of the inner square by black. They are now able to remove one of white's pieces.
As the game progresses, the white player continues to attempt to make as many mills as possible, guided by the black player who places a piece at A4 in the 10th move of the game, after replacing the piece taken at D5. White responds by placing the 11th piece at C4.

 Figure 35: Black places the ninth piece of the game to make a mill.

In Figure 35, white has made yet another mill and will remove a black piece from the board. All the black pieces currently on the board are in necessary positions. White can still win if black does not have the correct pieces placed. The piece at D5 could be at any of the cardinal points but needs to be present to stop white from making four mills. Without it, black will lose. The black pieces 4 and 2 at B4 and F4 are also needed to ensure white is unable to move the pieces currently forming mills. The black 10 at A1 is also required as will be seen later. In this example, white will remove the black piece numbered 4 and black will replace it with piece 12. The white player will usually pause at this point, perhaps wondering why black is allowing them to make so many mills, but they will usually continue and make a third mill in the 13th move of the game.

 Figure 36: Black has made a third mill and will remove another white piece.
In Figure 37, black will place on D2. If white had placed 15 here instead of at A4, black would place 16 at D1. In this case however, we made white place at D7 in order to introduce a strategy which will be used by black.

Figure 37: Black places at A4 for the purpose of instruction. Usually they would place at A1, F2, or B4. If Black placed piece 15 at B2 or B6, they would lose without being able to move at all.
White’s placement of their second to last piece (15) is normally somewhere they believe will hinder a black placement. Their last piece number 17 at F2 is where they assume they will stop black from making a mill with pieces 12, 16 and 14 along line 2. However, this piece is now surrounded with no movement options and is of no further use to them. This kind of “dead” move is discussed more later in the book.
Black must be careful to place their last piece next to the otherwise very mobile white 15 at D7. This ensures that wherever white moves that piece, black 18 can follow. If black 18 was placed at G4 instead, white could move towards it and push it away in subsequent moves, as black would only be able to move clockwise. 
As the game enters stage two, white moves first, and wherever white moves piece 15, it will become stuck; either at A7, B6 or F6. Black will win the game despite never forming a mill, so long as it continues to herd the white 15.
White has effectively ensured that at the end of placement, they only have one mobile piece, while black has two. This is why black could not let white make four mills. If they did, black would only have one spare piece and white and black would chase each other around the outer square until they agreed on a draw.
From this simple example we see that a player may easily crowd their own pieces in stage one, and that just one more mobile piece placed at one of the least valuable positions such as black 18 at G7 can be the piece that wins the game. Of course, in this case and many others, the winner also dominates because they own more of the middle cardinal points. Yet another takeaway from this example is that mills formed at the inner or outer squares in the first stage can be very limiting in the second stage where movement becomes very important.
7.2. Try, Try Again (Game Two)
Next, we will play a more common start, this time having learnt a little from before, but white will still try to form mills from the start. In this game, black takes two of the inner cardinal points, as does white. White then starts trying to set up conditions where black can only stop one of two mills in Figure 39, a different placement but following the same principle as before. The video and description can be found at the following link, or by using the QR code. Alternately, the game can be imported to Sanmill from Figure 38.

Figure 38: Game 2 Sanmill import


 
Figure 39: Game 2. Black takes inner cardinal points and starts trying for mills
Black could at this point form their own cardinal mill, placing at b6, as white did not first place at f2. However, let’s explore what happens if they both do not. Firstly, we will investigate some poor moves and see what goes wrong. Later, we will return to this game start in much more detail.
Black this time will attempt to stop at least one mill being made by white, placing a piece at E4. White places next at D3, and black, wanting to stop black from making a cardinal point mill spanning three squares, will place a piece at D1. White then completes a mill line 3 in Figure 40.

 Figure 40: Game 2. Black has formed a mill and will remove a white piece from the board.

It does not matter which piece white removes in this game, black should replace it to retain these positions which are among the most influential places on the current board not occupied by white (not always true but for argument’s sake...). White will then try to make another mill by placing at F2, which black is obliged to try to stop, by placing either at B2 or F6. White places in whichever of these two places that black does not, as shown in Figure 41.


Figure 41: Game 2a. Black has formed a second mill and can remove another of white's pieces.

Here, white has formed a second mill and can remove a black piece (12). Black is obliged to replace it with piece 14, and white feels obliged to stop black from forming a mill by placing at B6. Another strategy could be to not place a piece at B6 and allow black to close that mill in the movement stage, instead placing at A4; we will cover that later in the book under starting plays.
 At this point, white will have two pieces remaining to black’s one piece. The main danger to black in Figure 41 is white 9 at C3, which is free to move to recreate a mill. Black can elect to place a piece at C4, leading to white placing at A4, which would be free to move. To avoid that, black will place at A4 instead, then place at C5 to surround white as per the game in Figure 42.

Figure 42: Game 2a. At the end of the placement stage, Black can only move piece number 3.

White can only move piece number 3 to G4 at this point, and black can freely move piece 16. 
When white moves piece 3 to G4, black’s piece 12 should move down to F4 to stop white 11 from opening and re-forming a mill. A sequence of moves follows where white 3 meets and repels black 16, both then moving anti-clockwise around the outer square. Afterwards, if white 3 moves up, black should move piece 16 up as well. This brings us to the board in Figure 43.

Figure 43: Game 2a. Black 3 moved anticlockwise. White moved up but had to move back down, being herded by black 3. Eventually, white must move piece 8 right.
When black 16 is blocked by black 8, black must move 8. Here, white will move piece 1 down, making a diamond with 13,7, 1, and 11. It does not matter which piece black removes when it makes a mill with 10, 14 and 8. White will be able to make a mill on the next move. If black removes the 1 piece at D1 however, white will be able to move piece 7 up and down, making a mill each move. This is very difficult to recover from and generally results in a win for white. If black removes white’s 11 piece, white can take black 4, creating another mobile diamond shape which can be used as a dual mill. It is difficult for black to lose game 2a when played this way. Later we will see what black should have done, under starting plays. However this will suffice for now.
7.3 Alternate Game Two
Looking back at Figure 40 where the tenth piece in the placement stage will be placed, let us see what happens if black places at b2 instead of f6, which occurs in Figure 45 below. Again, a video of the following sequence of figures is available at the provided link or the game can be imported by use of the QR code.

Figure 44: Alternate Game 2 - moves for import into Sanmill

https://youtu.be/4Ja-ThmpD-U

Figure 45: Game 2b. Black still has two mills, but they are at right angles.
In Figure 45, white will remove the black piece 12, and black will replace it. White will then place in position b6. This time, black places directly at c4, and white places at a4 to stop black forming a mill. Black is then free to place their last piece at g4 as seen in Figure 46, to avoid white 3 breaking away and forcing a mill closure.

Figure 46: Game 2b. White stops black 3 by using one less piece to contain black 9. Black 17 is free to move in two directions.

By using one less piece to contain the horizontal mill at line 3, black has spared a piece to contain the vertical mill at line f.
White now must move and has two choices, piece 17 either moves up or down. Either way, black will move 4 left, and white will need to move 15 down to stop 14 from moving up to complete a mill at line 4 with 4, 14 and 16. 
If white moves piece 17 in Figure 46 down, black can move 4 up then clockwise and make a mill with 4, 18 and 8.

Figure 47: Game 2b (17 down). Black moved 17 down, white moved 4 left and then clockwise, with 17 chasing 4.

In Figure 47, black is in a good position and can make a mill. If black removes white 17, it can use 14 to block both of white’s mills from opening when white moves 1 down, then pick off the mobile pieces at will.
If white instead moved 17 in Figure 46 up, black completes a mill at G with 4, 8 and 18, as per Figure 48. By moving piece 18, black frees up white 3 to move right to G4, and despite black moving 10 right to block the mill re-forming, white can open its horizontal mill at line 3, taking a black piece. Both players are now involved in a shoot-out and will likely end up playing an endgame with three pieces each.

Figure 48: Game 2b (17 up). Black moves up and white makes a mill, having to move 18 down.
By opening and closing the mill at E, white will be able to stop black from forming a double mill at lines 1 and 4, where black could have otherwise removed a piece each turn. When each player has only one mill working at a time, that mill takes two turns to break and re-form. Therefore, the player tries not to have the mill open when the opponent is going to close theirs, opting to move a free piece instead. Otherwise, the opponent will remove one of their three mill pieces and the player no longer has a mill.
It is recommended to study these types of start games, as it is a common strategy for beginners to form mills in the beginning stages. Before we investigate the middle and end games, let us look at how to start without getting trapped by the opponent. The aim in the next described game is to instead prepare for different options and create possibilities, which means greater potential for movement.
7.4. A Better Beginning
Attempting to make maximum mills in the first stage is not always a great strategy, although the mill rush and one Z mill play will be covered extensively at the end of this book as we study starting plays.. In those cases, if all moves are known to the players, they will still come out as a draw.
It can be a better tactic to set up potential mills all throughout the first stage, causing the opponent to scatter their pieces, (which can be more powerful in groups of twos as we will discover) to push outward on the opponent and reduce their potential movements. Alternately, partially mobile groups of three can create mills in the movement stage where the opponent cannot immediately replace lost pieces.
To guarantee that such a game is played, the player must ensure the opponent is unable to play the type of game described in game two, especially if the opponent intends to delay the moves that were made in game two by enough turns that they are able to make their final mill with their last piece. This would give them a large advantage.
7.5. Game Three
For this reason, many of the opening plays made by seasoned players appear as in Figure 50 below, where both white and black have each made their opening three moves. 
The last provided video is for game three and is at the link that follows. The QR code for the start of the play is below.


Figure 49 Game three setup Sanmil import.



https://youtu.be/j_knvO007OE

 Figure 50: Opening moves in game 3. Both white and black move to stop each other forming mills as per game 2.

Here in Figure 50, both black and white have stopped each other from placing pieces at e3 and c5 and making mills with the centre cardinal positions or inner square. Some players will attempt to set up two partial mills, which in this case would mean black instead places at piece 6 at b6. However, the gain from removing a white piece in this case does not necessarily exceed the loss from having up to 4 black pieces unable to move19, at line b and line 6. On the other hand, to hold all these black pieces in place will require white pieces at d2, a4, c4, f6, d5 or f6 or d7, adding to a total of five pieces required to hold black’s four. 
However, back to this example; white places piece 7 at e5 which could enable them to create a potential mill with a further white piece placed at c4, either at line c or 5, depending on black’s response as illustrated in Figure 51.

Figure 51: Game 3. Black places at C5 and white at G4.

Both players in Figure 51 have stopped each other forming mills spanning beyond the centre positions at the cardinal points, except in the case where dual mills can still be formed in the centre square. In Figure 52, black is going to extend into the outer square, and to crowd white into the centre square by directing them to place at d5 instead of c5. White does this to stop black from forming a cardinal mill, at the cost of the dual potential mill they were aiming for on lines f and 2.

Figure 52: Game 3. White placed at A4 after black placed at B2.

Here, black would consider their next move. White now has only one open mill in the centre instead of two potential mills, but they still have two potential mills they can set up in the centre square by placing a piece at f2. Black must consider if they want to block the mill at line 5, or risk leaving it open (hoping black does not place at c5), so they can remove a piece from black in the movement stage. In this game, black will try to stop white from forming mills in Figure 53 by placing piece 12 at F2.

 Figure 53: Game 3. White placed piece 12 at F6, black at G7.

White, stopped from forming another two potential mills by black has placed a piece at g1. This stops black from forming a mill on the right hand and lower sides of the outer square but at a cost of future mobility and current initiative. However, black is still able to play on line a and line 7 and is additionally free to focus on the inner square.
Black can place one piece at c5 to stop the mill at line 5, or at both c3 and a4 to counter the un-formed mill at line 5. This will mean that white will have to disarm the mill that will otherwise form at line 4 by removing one of those pieces instead of, for example, the piece at d6, which traps the mill white forms at line 5. We will see how that plays out in Figure 54.

 Figure 54: Game 3. White placed at E3.

Black must try to keep a mobile piece, as when it places piece 16 at c3, it cannot move 2, 14, 4, 16 or 6 away from white’s open mill. If black had lost a piece during stage one, it should not attempt this simply because it takes so many pieces to achieve the intended result. White may want to place at g7 so they can make a mill at the right of the outer square, which will use up black’s number 18 piece, and stop black making an open mill with 16 and 6, with which they could remove one of white’s open mill pieces. In this case it is a poor option for white as it removes their possible moves in the next stage (13 can no longer move up). All of this can be seen in Figure 55 on the next page.


Figure 55: Game 3. The end of placement in stage one.

If white, who only has four move-able pieces to black’s six move-able pieces, chooses to move 5 up into a mill at C, they are obliged to remove either 14, 4 or 16 from the board, otherwise black can form a mill and remove white’s number 3 piece to form their second mill or even white’s 1 to make a double mill at line 2 and 4(efg). White’s only other option is to move their 1 piece, and in either direction they open up black to make another mill. 
In this game, black seems to have ended up in the stronger position, thanks to their opening moves, and white’s move to g7. However, it is white that is in the winning position; black entered a losing trajectory when they placed piece 14 to a4. This move did not create potential on the board for black and we will cover that in more depth later. If white closes the mill on line 5 and removes black’s piece #16, white will eventually end up with mills and potential mills spanning lines 4 and 5.
Game 3 is an interesting one. When white closes the mill at line 5 and then removes the piece at c3, they can win in 11 moves as can be seen at the following link for the perfect database;
https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/#n-j-p-l-d-h-a-v-k-r-b-o-w-t-s-e-q-x

Figure 56: QR code for game 2 on the perfect database.

7.6. Common Starting Positions
So far, we have covered a few starting games which instead playing a blocking game or opting to create future advantage. 
We have already seen what usually happens when players try to make many mills in the beginning stage, and the beginnings of how to overcome their play when they do. Now we will look at how to best avoid that situation altogether. The first play to consider is where both player and opponent take a blocking approach in Figure 57.

Figure 57: Blocking: both players block each other from forming mills.
In a blocking strategy, the player attempts to remove the opponent’s ability to make dual potential mills. Here, the players have both claimed two of the valuable central cardinal positions. Each has then spent the next two moves placing a piece in the inner and outer squares beside the opponent’s central cardinal positions. There are still dual possible mills to be created in the inner and outer squares as in Figure 58, but all future efforts can be foiled by either player by interrupting any two of the opposition’s pieces with the players’ piece. In alternate games either player can place both their third and fourth piece on the same square, instead of both the inner and outer squares. Again, we will return to this later and go much deeper, but we will continue on for now to discuss some basics.
At any point in the above play, black or white can deviate to form a dual potential mill on the middle square as shown in the figure below, and this is a common play.
 
Figure 58: Each player can deviate from the blocking play to form a mill on the inner square.

As always, when forming a mill during placement, it is usually important to remove a piece the opponent must immediately replace, and not the cardinal position. If the cardinal piece opposite the first mill is removed, the opponent can use the next piece to block elsewhere or force the next move. This hands back the initiative in the play to the opponent and this requires knowing at least a little of how to play the many outcomes which may come from that move.
Alternatively, player 2 can attempt to stop player 1 from forming mills after securing just one of the central cardinal points as seen in the next play in Figure 59 where black placed piece #4 at f6, and white has assumed 3 cardinal positions.

Figure 59: Player 2 concedes an inner cardinal point.

In this tactic, black has made sure white cannot initially form a mill in the central square. However white is more likely to direct the game using the cardinal points. This will limit the movements black can make later, while opening a dual mill opportunity in the outer square towards the end of placement with their placement of piece #6 that is not blocking the cardinal mill positions. This can be by plan; in some advanced arrangements and starting plays, playing for the center mills or cardinal mills by either player is a bad move and can therefore be encouraged by the opponent with placement in diagonal positions. We will cover this more extensively later.
In another placement sequence, if players hold opposing central cardinal positions, neither can form a dual potential mill in the centre square as in Figure 60.

Figure 60: The players hold opposing central cardinal positions.

If player 2  in Figure 60 does not choose the opposing central cardinal point, player 1 can choose it. This game often becomes a draw in the author’s experience, and the games that branch from this beginning are not explored in this text, as it is not played very often, with most player 2’s placing their first piece directly opposite player 1’s piece in the centre cardinal positions, with the remainder disrupting by placing as below. We will get more into those moves as well, later in the book.

7.7. A Gambit
The following game beginning is an example of something in chess called a gambit. In chess, a gambit is when a player sacrifices a piece or pieces in the opening play to gain future advantage. In Nine Men’s Morris, there are also gambits. In the game in Error: Reference source not found, white’s opening move could be seen as a gambit, and it can be a rather effective one when the opponent takes the bait, if they do not know the correct response. Which, of course, we will return to later in the book.

Figure 61: Gambit. Black forms a mill and removes white 2.

White forms a mill and removes black’s piece at f2. This creates an opportunity for black to complete a mill by placing at f2. If they do, they will have to remove white 1 at d6 as they cannot remove a piece of a straight mill unless that is the only option for removal. This creates an interesting situation where white, having placed first will, in stage 2 during movement, be able to open and close their mill before black. So, black feels they must fill the positions at d2 and d6. While black is doing that, white is free to set up another dual potential mill, which we can see in Figure 62.

Figure 62: Gambit. White sets up another dual potential mill.

If white makes their future moves correctly, they will likely win. From the position shown in the above board. The following image,  Figure 63 shows two likely outcomes, where white either did or did not place piece 12 at e3. In both cases, because black needs to fill five pieces on the middle square they cannot make future mills or restrict white’s movements.

Figure 63 Gambit. Two games resulting from Figure 5.8 are shown at the end of stage 1. in the game on the right

The above figure shows two parallel games, where each has progressed from Figure 62 with careful or not so careful placements from white in response to varied placements by black. In the game on the right, where white can move first piece 3 then potentially piece 15 for their benefit, and black is at a significant disadvantage. On the left, black has more options after white moves piece 17 to position g7. There, white did not place piece 13 correctly, and the reader is encouraged to look at where it should have placed using the perfect database.
The gambit shown here should be experimented with by the reader, who would also benefit from knowing game variations that result from black declining black’s gambit. We will get to that as well, in the section on starting plays.
7.8. Last Moves in Stage One
At the end of stage one, the aim is to have either just closed a mill (especially if the player places last), or to have one or more open mills ready to close. In a third case, a player benefits from having three pieces not tied to holding positions, which they can use to form a mill quicker than the opponent. The player who moves second has an advantage, in that they have the last move in stage one to achieve this and can just go about setting up dual potential mills during stage one. White has first move in stage two, and benefits from setting up open mills in stage one that it can now close.
We see this in Figure 64 where white has ended with what may appear as the ability to make a mill on the outer right square. However, in this game the advantage remains with black who started second and places last. Black can place their last piece in one of two positions in the inner square to make a mill. White did not place well in the below game, where piece #11  and piece #13 was placed to little effect; black’s move to f5 places them on a winning trajectory and their last placement allows them to remove piece #3 for a win in 7 moves.

Black could have also placed piece #16 at G1 to force white to respond at d1, but because white has made more errors on the board such as the inconsequential placement of piece #15, it has little detriment to black’s game.

Having a look at this game to see why white’s moves were poor can be helpful for the beginner player, so they are encouraged to inspect the moves at https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/.

Figure 64: Goals for end of placement stage. Black is yet to place the last piece at either location indicated with black circles.

There are many starting moves that can be contemplated, but remembering all the starting plays that have been covered to this point will create a good foundation for most beginning plays covered later. So far, we have explored games that can be studied well, at least for the first eight or so moves into stage two. But opponents rarely do the expected, and even poor players can put a more experienced player into unknown and uncertain game territory that levels the playing field somewhat. 
So let us look at some general knowledge and piecemeal strategies that a player can be mindful of in any game, for when they find themselves someplace uncharted.
Consider the example of the previous gambit play by white. As was already established, it would be better for black in that situation to decline the gambit, unless they have studied the various places to move in return. But how should white in that situation then apply what we just discussed regarding ending goals for stage one?

The game is here for importing into Sanmill for your investigation .

Figure 65: Sanmill game import point.

While white is busy moving to fill the open mill left by black at f2, black can move to c4 and then d5 as shown in Figure 66. This only works if the bottom and right outer square edges are not interrupted by white with piece 11, so for this example we made white place in the top left. Given the way white set up the first mill, they may assume black is intending to move piece 14 to c5 in the same manner. In response, they confidently move piece 13  to c5.

Figure 66: White created a mill, black responds with misdirection.

When white places at c5, and black places at e3, there are two places in the centre square where black could form mills using pieces 10, 12, 14, 2 and 8. White now needs to respond with their two remaining pieces, and this leaves black free to place piece 16 at g1. Even if white had a tenth piece in this situation, black will still be able to make a mill at the start of stage 2, as seen in Figure 67 below.

Figure 67: Black cannot stop white from forming a mill in stage 2.

If white does not place piece 17 to a1 or g7, black can place piece 18 at either a1 or g7 and close a mill in stage 2. The alternative still allows black to make a mill at line 4(efg).
This is quite an unexpected turn of events for white that could have been avoided if white placed piece 11 elsewhere. See the following link for the places indicated in grey when Analyse is clicked, where white should have moved to.


Figure 68: QR code for 
https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/#j-p-l-n-k-i-mn-n-o-d

Once play reaches movement in stage 2, whatever the opening moves have been, creating mills is an important aspect of game-play. While mill formation has been discussed in the preceding text, they will now be covered more comprehensively in the following section. 

7.9. A Merry-Go-Round
Consider the game snapshot in Figure 69 over the page where black has one corner piece and white, busy with the centre square has only one piece on the outer square beside it.  Black has three remaining pieces so an interesting play is available which will set them up for a strong position in the mid-game.
Black can use the lack of other white placements in the outer square and the black pieces at the cardinal positions there to force white to plug potential mills. However, white runs out of pieces and black is left with a potential mill.

Figure 69: Merry go- round. White places second and with three pieces to place can simply place at the outer corners.

If black does this, the mid game will start as of Figure 70 following.

Figure 70: Merry-go-round. Black places their three remaining pieces on the outer corners.

This is actually not ideal; black loses the winning trajectory that were on with placement of piece #16; had they placed to a4 they would have retained it. This is an example of end-game placement patterns that will be covered later, which involve counting out your remaining pieces and seeing if you can keep your opponent busy with your last three to four pieces, without setting them up to advantage and finishing with a stronger position.

8. Mills
8.1. Protecting Open Mills
Mills are valuable and need to be protected when they open, but opening mills to re-form them can become problematic where the opponent has a mill ready to close. This is because the opponent is waiting to close their mill and destroy the player’s now open mill. If an opponent does this, it can be beneficial to force them to close the mill by directing a piece toward the open mill to plug it. However, if such a piece is unavailable for the purpose, moving a piece alongside a mill on the centre square, then opening the mill in the centre creates a condition where no matter which piece is removed by the opponent, the player will still be able to form a mill. This is shown by the pieces in Figure 52 in white, with a second viable pattern that is shown with black pieces and a third with grey. The black arrangement is often easier to form, but both placements offer some protection tactically to the opponent’s open mill. The grey version can take two turns to reassemble, just like the black version. All three versions offer some protection to an open mill.

Figure 71: These white, black or grey pieces could always form a mill in one or two moves even if one piece was removed.

8.2. Dual Mills and Cardinal Mills
Mills that line up with the cardinal directions and involve a centre cardinal position are more beneficial than other mills, as can be seen in Figure 72 where the cardinal mill cannot be held completely static by three of the opposing pieces, while the outer mill  in line g can. If you can create a cardinal mill spanning three squares, you should almost always do so and build your strategy around it as it will usually lead to a strong position and often a winning one. 
This understanding can be used to influence a player to move or place a piece somewhere they don’t want to as they will want to stop their opponent forming a cardinal mill. This takes the initiative away from the opponent and can be an important strategy for the second player during the placement stage, as the player who starts, starts with the initiative. For the second player, to steal the initiative and have the last placement can be very beneficial. 
For now though, back to mills.

Figure 72: Not all mills are the same. Cardinal mills are more valuable.


Dual mills as seen in Figure 72 are even better than single mills, where the piece indicated with a blue line could be moved back and forth, forming a new mill each move. This enables the rapid decimation of the opposition’s pieces. Care should be taken to have a second mill ready to close when the opponent gets to three pieces, as otherwise the double mill can become plugged. 

8.3. Entwined Mills
In some situations, a player with one mill may find themselves in a position where by closing their mill, they form another open mill, giving them a backup mill to close in the very next turn. This situation can dictate which is the better way to open the first mill, or which of the opponent’s pieces to remove to enable the condition. It is especially useful when the opponent has a mill of their own, as their mill is rendered powerless. We can see this condition in the following two images in Figure 73.

Figure 73: Entwined mills, where closing one mill creates another open mill.

The right-hand piece of the black mill opens and closes that mill. If black attempts to open its own mill, white could close the second backup mill. This removes much of the advantage the black mill has in the midgame.

8.4. Separate Mills
Separate dual mills where they are opened and closed in an alternating fashion, can also overcome the advantage offered by the opposition’s mill, so long as there are sufficient pieces nearby that the player’s second mill can be re-formed if the player is forced to use both mills in succession (such as by the approach of a plugging piece). Otherwise, and preferably, the first mill should remain open and ready to close if the opponent opens theirs, while the second mill keeps opening and re-forming. The game snapshot in Figure 74 below shows a situation where this setup has been used to reduce the opponent to four pieces.

Figure 74: Using two separate mills can be decimating to the opposition if handled well.

8.5. Ending the Game with Mills
Nine Men’s Morris can be won by removing pieces through closing of mills, or by restricting the opponent’s pieces movement options until none remain in a process here referred to as herding. Before we cover herding in game four, let us use the following snapshot to look at the best way to avoid herding altogether and instead end the game with mills. Continuing from Figure 74, black should attempt to make a mill as quickly as possible so that white removes a piece to stop it, causing them to end up with three pieces. White on the other hand wants to avoid having to herd black’s four scattered pieces together. It is easy then for white in this case to win by forming multiple mills. By moving two pieces, they can have three open mills ready to close. This is revealed in Figure 75.


Figure 75: Black has three open mills, closes one to remove black's fourth remaining piece.

In Figure 75, white can close the mill at line 2 with the piece at d1, removing a black piece from the board. This means that black becomes hyper-mobile but is unable to fill both d5 and f6 in the next turn and will lose the game.
There are many ways to form three open mills, and the minimum number of pieces required can be either six or seven, depending on whether the opponent is moving into or out of the open mill. We will cover this in more detail late in the book. 
In the case of Figure 76, black has moved into the open mill positions, and white must have the seventh piece on the left with which to move, to force black to move out of one of the open mill positions. In this case, white is forming the mills in situ, with black filling the positions as they form. This is due to white already having removed the fourth black piece before white was in position with three open mills, so black is already hyper-mobile.

Figure 76: Minimum pieces required to form three open mills.


8.6. Nullifying Mills
Nullifying mills can be one of the most important tasks in Nine Men’s Morris. When the opponent forms an open mill, having a mill of your own open will usually dictate to your opponent that they must disable that mill instead of taking a different piece. When the mill the opponent is closing is otherwise surrounded, and the player’s open mill contains two pieces, each of which may complete the closure, this will normally keep the opponent from being able to close their mill. This is because doing so will render it a one-shot affair as seen in Figure 77.

Figure 77: Mill nullification. Black must deal with white's intended mill on line 4(e,f,g) if they close their own mill.
In the above snapshot in Figure 77, black is to move and must choose between dealing with white’s open mill on the right and the mill white may form on the left. Either way, black cannot remove both piece 1 and 2, so white will be able to keep the last black mill closed The alternative is for black to remove the piece at c4, but that allows white the use of their mill. Often this stalemate will keep black from closing their mill, unless there is another urgent condition to solve, or if losing mill mobility opens a further advantage to black, such as surrounding a mill or allowing another mill to operate.
In the above case, black should remove the piece numbered 1, so that white is forced to move the piece numbered 2 into a blocking position at e4. This will allow Black to form a mill at line f before white can form the mill at line 5(abc).

Given this, it would be wise for black to close the mill in this case. It would have been unwise if the piece at d2 was elsewhere, say at d1, as this would mean white can form the mill at 4(a,b,c) before they can make the mill at line f.

However, for your interest, there are other plays for black, one of which is contained in the QR code below.

Figure 78: Another play for black from Figure 77
9. Other Winning Strategies
9.1 Springs
There is a useful technique which can be set up on an unsuspecting opponent at the end of stage one. Consider the arrangement of pieces in Figure 79. In the inside square, both players have two pieces together with arrows indicated between them. You can imagine these arrows are springs. In this case it is white’s move, and all their pieces except one are, or will be trapped. The only piece that can move has a black spring behind it, and a white piece in the center cardinal position beside it. If as white moves that piece, black moves along behind it, it will soon be stuck. 
As an aside, the lower white piece is also stuck; although it can move, doing so would allow black to close a mill. It is possible to create this condition at all four central cardinal points if the opponent holds them all while the player holds the central square corners.

Figure 79: Springs can help compress opponent's pieces.


9.2. Herding (Winning without Mills)
We have touched on the strategy of herding previously in game one. It is another way to win in a game of Nine Men’s Morris, not by removing pieces by making mills, but through restricting the movement of the opponent until they are unable to make a play.
The antidote to this tactic of herding when it is being used against a player is having a piece with absolute freedom to move back and forth. This is shown in Figure 80 where black has otherwise herded white in the direction of the blue arrow. Were it not for the bottom-most white piece, white would be forced to move away from plugging black’s open mill at line 4(efg).

Figure 80: A free piece can help nullify a herding tactic.

9.4. Game Four
Where an opponent does not have a free piece, herding can be an optimal strategy to use against them as the game can be won well before the opponent has only three pieces and becomes hyper-mobile. This herding principle can be observed in the following game from Figure 81.


Figure 81: Game 4. White takes advantage of black player placing 5 at D7 instead of G4.
The QR code to import the game to Sanmill is below.

Figure 82: Game 4 QR code

When white places piece 5 at g4, black puts a piece on b6. White will next place at f2, black at a4, then white at a1. Black will stop white forming a mill at line a as follows in Figure 83.

Figure 83: Game 4. White player 2 has taken the initiative from black player 1, forcing them to place in positions with little movement. Later, white will herd the black player to a losing position.

In this game, white attempts to set itself up to make future mills but black is careful to load its pieces in pairs, where one piece remains fixed next to a white piece, but the other can move away when white moves, forcing white to group together. The setup for this is complete in Figure 84 with the placement of black piece # 18.

Figure 84: Game 4. White having directed black's placements to the bottom edge, loads a spring at C4-5.

In Figure 84, black can herd or follow 15 with 12, 9 with 18, 17 with 10 or 5 with 14. In a pinch, 6 can follow 3, and 16 can pursue 1. What is important is that there is a spring in both the inner and outer squares (5(d,e))and a(4,7)), and 18 is chasing 9 past its own colour at f4 (4), so the opponent cannot sneak in behind piece 18 as it goes past. 
If black were to pursue 3 with 8, white will regain initiative with 11 on the outer square. If white moves 3 down, 6 would follow and make a mill with 8 and 12 as 12 came past. If 3 moves right, 6 could make a mill with 8 and 2. Another option for white is to move 5 up, but 14 will follow, as will 13. Then 2 will move down, 4 will chase 7, and we end up in a similar position. However, white is unlikely to move 5 up, because it moves black closer to making a mill at the 4(e,f,g) cardinal position. Lastly, if white moves piece # one right, 16 would follow (assuming white’s #15 is in position to stop a mill on line 5). This is white’s chance of a draw, with the pieces on the inner square travelling around anti-clockwise. 
All of this works for white because white is player 1 and has to move first, and also because black can keep 8 and 16 stationary, having started movement phase with all of its pieces placed next to a white piece. This is something the first player should avoid (having opponent’s pieces surrounding theirs and in adjacent places) and the second player be mindful to achieve at the end of placement in stage one20.
9.4. Creating Opportunities
When neither player appears to have the upper hand, especially in a case where each player has almost the same number of pieces, it benefits a player to remember that there are no random moves. Pieces have several types of value, which can be prioritised. These priorities, in lieu of being able to form an unconstrained mill that can open and re-form, are as follows:
Initiative. A player who is forcing the opponent to respond has the initiative and can dictate the flow of play. The player should never let the opponent form a beneficial cardinal mill, nor the opponent the player21 and this is used by a good player to direct the opponent’s moves. Importantly, this not always be done by using two adjacent pieces. If the player does not use two separated pieces on occasion to direct the opponent’s placements, their pieces may become surrounded. 
Position value. Pieces at cardinal points, especially within the centre square, have the most value, not only because they have more movement options but because they control passage between the squares. A player who controls all four and does not have to move them can force a draw if there are no mills or active springs. Try not to vacate these positions unless it gives you initiative or helps set up or disrupt a spring, mill, or herding attempt.
Sequence value. Two pieces are better than one. Avoid alternating pieces with the opponent, or letting an opponent slip their own piece between two of yours, unless this gains you position or initiative. Two same-coloured pieces can be very handy if acting like a spring to push on the opponent’s pieces.
Movement value. Especially true of stage two, pieces that cannot move are unable to contribute to the game except to maybe block. If a piece can go from one to having two movement options, then all else being equal, your position is improving. If a piece can go from having one movement to the opposition, to instead having an extra movement to another same-coloured piece, you have taken a movement option from your opponent. Although this usually has a low priority, it can be the most important aspect of a game.
As always, there are exceptions to these rules, which experience will inform.
10. End Game (first visit)
If a player gets down to three pieces, they can move any piece to any unoccupied place anywhere on the board each turn. This tips the scales somewhat so that the player still moving their pieces one place at a time requires at least six pieces to force a win against a person with three hyper-mobile pieces (Gasser, 1996))22.  So, if you have five pieces, it is best to try to herd the opponent’s less mobile four pieces or to have the opponent reduce you to three pieces, than try to take the fourth piece from the board.
In his series of papers on Merels, Gasser (1995) (1996) calculated the chance for the moving player to win given both the number of pieces they have and the number of pieces the opponent still has on the board. This is, of course, determined by evaluating all known possible positions, not all likely positions, and is not necessarily true of an individual game. However, taken as a guiding principle, Gasser’s calculations predict that if the player to move has three pieces, their chances greatly improve to the same percentage as when they had seven pieces, so long as their opponent has three pieces. Alternately, if their opponent has four pieces, and the moving player has been reduced to three, their odds improve to the same as when they had five pieces. While Gasser only investigated the mathematical outcomes of the game, his findings are consistent with the assertions of this strategy guide.
Gasser’s calculations also show that it is prudent to win by reducing movement instead of taking pieces from the board, due to the benefit gained by having hyper-mobile pieces. Additionally, if a player who has four pieces against three must move, they have a very small chance of winning unless they can close a mill immediately upon losing the fourth piece. This will be investigated and confirmed in the coming pages.
10.1. Three versus Four to Three versus Three
Where one player has three pieces and the opponent has four and the player with three pieces forms a mill, if the opponent does not immediately place a piece with another such that a third would form a mill, they will lose. To show this, an endgame has been created. The player in Figure 85 will form a mill against the opponent by moving piece 4 to f6 and will remove piece 17, so that each player will have three pieces. 

Figure 85: Three pieces to four in an endgame. Mill placement and piece elimination can decide the game.

Ideally, the black player has selected a moment that is beneficial to them. This will be discussed in game five to follow, where the optimal strategy for the player with four pieces is presented. The optimal strategy for the player with three pieces is also discussed in game five, and later in a section dedicated to the end game.
In Figure 86, black formed a mill, and removed white piece 17. 

Figure 86: White forms a mill and removes a piece from black. This takes black from four to three pieces

White has lost a piece and it is their move. Where should they move to stay in the game?23 While white is already on a losing trajectory, it is possible that black will make a mistake.


Figure 87: White wins with a double potential mill.

In Figure 87, white incorrectly moves piece 1 to c5 and black is free to move piece 4 to e4, forming a potential double mill. From this series of board game figures, we see that if the white player reaches three pieces does not set up a potential mill, they will lose the game. Even if white tries to form a mill, black will regain initiative in the next move. The process to achieve this is discussed in the end section of the next game.

10.2. Game Five a
The next game is an altered progression of one of the variations to a starting sequence we will detail later in this book, one this author uses often and to good effect. The play can become a draw several moves into the second stage of the game, but more often becomes a succession of closing mills and a 3 vs 3 endgame.
In this occasion, we will tweak the usual outcome a little so that black removes less pieces. This way we can explore an successful 7 vs 4 play.
As usual, the QR code contains the game steps for importing into Sanmill. Shown on the left for your interest is the general starting moves that we will cover later, and this particular variation of that start is on the right.

Figure 88 A starting play variation that can lead to an extended endgame.

In order to get to the stage of the game below in Figure 89, black foregoes the option of responding to white’s move from d6-d5 by closing the mill at line 2, bringing #8 down. We will return to this point and continue from there down another track in just a moment. 
Figure 89: Black disables white's double mill by closing their single mill.

However in this variation, black moves #10 down to d6, and white closes the mill at line 5, removing black’s number 10 piece.

Black now is faced with white’s double mill which could oscillate from line 5 to line 6, removing a piece at a time from black. By removing black 18 as part of that process, white could be assured that black would be unable to fill both the potential mills present when they become hyper-mobile with three pieces remaining and they would lose. Instead, Black closes their mill at line 2 and removes the most inconvenient piece it can see; piece #7 at b6. If they remove piece #5, white can move #1 back up, then #3 up, and be back in a similar situation.
Figure 90: White opens their mill and black keeps theirs closed; white removes black's piece #18

White next opens their mill, bringing #9 down as seen above in Figure 90. Black does not open their only mill for fear of losing it, and white closes the mill again to remove piece #18.
Next, in Figure 91, black opens their mill, trying to shed pieces to get to the hyper-mobile state. White closes the mill at line e, and black starts moving their pieces to the outer square in the hope that they will not be herded together or blocked from movement.
Figure 91: Black is trying to shed pieces to get to 3 remaining as soon as possible

White is now able to open the mill at line e, using the space of the potential mill that existed at c5-d6-e5, and Black continues moving #12, #14 and #16 together, so white has to remove them. The sooner they get to three pieces or hopefully remove another of white’s remaining seven pieces, the better they will be.
White is now in a good position to finish with all seven pieces remaining and can arrange their pieces so that when black is reduced to 3, there are two places they need to fill to block potential mills, and they will lose.
Figure 92: White moves from d6 - d5 and will remove the piece at c4

White in Figure 92 has just closed the mill at line 5, moving #1 down. They will next remove the black #16 piece. Black must immediately fill the position at e4, and white will move #9 down, creating two potential mills at both line 3 and 5. Black has lost.

10.3. Game 5b
In game 5b from Figure 93, Black neglected to disable white’s mill at their first convenience, and the game there-after went poorly. This time, they will remove piece #1.

Figure 93: Game 5b, black removes white's piece #1 at d5
­
Figure 94: Game 5b
White responds by moving #5 to d6, and can use #3 to feed back into the mill at line 6. Having pieces nearby like this can be especially handy during the game. Black is forced to open a mill before white can get their dual mill up and running again, as shown in the next image.

Figure 95: White moves f6 - d6 and black moves b2 - b4
Next, a series of mills are sacrificed. White goes from almost having a dual mill and another potential mill at line 5, and black goes from two mills to one, with the result shown in Figure 96.

Figure 96: A result of mill exchanges; players are reduced to 4 and 5 pieces

It may seem that black is in a winning position, but with less than 6 pieces, they are poorly positioned. The game progresses until white is reduced to 3 pieces and black to four.







Figure 97: Game 5b; 4 vs 3

White is able to get between the black pieces in Figure 98, and is able to form a mill at line d(1,2,3) then remove a piece from the remaining pair that could potentially make a mill with the addition of another piece. Pieces #8 and #6 are unable to support each other and can be left.

Figure 98: Game 5b; white separates the black pieces.
Following on from Figure 98 black then moves #14 to f4, white responds with #7 to f6, black then moves # 6 to d3, and white moves #5 to g1.
White is attempting to extricate itself from black’s blocking attempts, and will move the pieces #5 and #7 to the opposite side of the board, moving this time back toward the T shape at e(3,4,5) and 4(e,f,g) from both directions as indicated in Figure 99.

Figure 99: Game 5b; 3 vs 3 hyper-mobile play.

There are more ways the above can be accomplished. Two more end positions from a different game is shown in Figure 100 below with the resulting positions of the opponent’s pieces. These plays allow a player to force a win if the opponent makes a mistake by leaving the wrong square unoccupied. 
Figure 100: Endgame plays. Here we see two endgame plays, with the opponents’ pieces still in position.
In a three-on-three game, the player with the initiative can almost always win. Exceptions to this can be found in the puzzle section of this book. Finding the win however can be difficult. If the two T intersection pieces are in place, and the T intersection itself is otherwise clear, the player can move the third piece into the position as shown above, attempting to form a mill in concert with one of the other pieces. Then, this piece can be moved such that all three pieces form a right angle. If the T intersection is not cleared by the opponent, the player should attempt another pattern or shape that is clear of the opponent’s pieces. If the player responding to these moves does not vacate one of the circled places, always moving the correct piece, the opponent must take the game to the other side of the board as indicated in game 5b or the result will be a draw.
There are several things that become evident from an investigation of endgame play. Firstly, the ‘movement capability’ investigated earlier in this book in section 4.7 Basic Rules of Play no longer holds. As soon as a player has three pieces, each position has up to 21 available potential movements, so corner pieces on the centre square have as much value as the inner cardinal points. This requires a shift in thinking.
Additionally, the same positions that were inappropriately used for poor opening moves (where the player’s pieces end up being blocked by their own placements) are now the sought-after positions in the absence of blocking pieces. Once a player has the initiative and can keep dictating the placement of the other’s pieces, that player is best served to attempt the strategy outlined here.
10.4. A Fitting End
In an alternate endgame pattern of moves, white has their opponent with four pieces as in Figure 102 reduced to 3, where only one pair of two pieces were able to form a mill upon removal of the fourth piece. In this case white removes black’s piece from d7. 

Figure 101: Endgame; a fitting end.

Figure 102: Alternate ending play. white removes black's fourth piece from d7.


Black responds by moving a piece to F4, and white moves piece #1 to the opposite cadinal pointy on the left. Here the pieces are in the position shown in Figure 103. Black must now respond by moving a piece to a4.
       
Figure 103: Alternate end. White has two cardinal points at opposites in a 3 v 3 game.

If black had moved the piece at g1 to a4 instead, white can then move piece 3 at will between the left and right, to free places beside the pieces 1 and 2. White will then be able to remove black’s pieces from to adjacent sides of the middle square as shown in the next figure. This will enable it to move piece 1 or 2 from the diagonally opposite cardinal point  to the adjoining position between the adjacent sides and shortly thereafter win the game as in Figure 2.

Figure 104: Alternate end. White clears black from the middle square for victory.

The lesson here for black is not to allow white’s pieces to separate theirs at the beginning of a 3 vs 3 end game, wherever possible..
11. Further Strategies and Tactics
This guide is in no way exhaustive; the author is still striving for the perfect game-play that will never result in a loss and is still learning from much better players. The best way to learn how to play Mills is to play these better players, and they can be found playing Mills online 24/7 as discussed in the section on Resources.
Screen recorders can be employed with the apps and one can record the game-play, watching the recording afterwards to investigate where mistakes were made, opportunities missed, and where new strategies have been employed by the opponent. The player can work through each of the game branches until a winning play can be found for a particular starting pattern.
One tactic that has not been discussed yet is the use of feints to force an opponent to move a piece, for example, by threatening to form a mill you don’t intend to close. This is because the formed mill would be closed on by the opponent and put you in a bad position. However, in threatening, the opponent is forced to move a piece to form a deterrent which enables the player to move or restrict the opponent’s pieces. This level of strategy is difficult to employ because of all the interrelated pieces on the board and can sometimes have unintended consequences.
11.1. Controlling the board
We will now consider another game, chiefly to describe a situation where an open mill was used to affect the opponent’s movements on the other side of the board. The winner will be white, and beginning moves will not be shown. The moves made so far bring the game to the point in Figure 17.

 Figure 105: Three and a half minutes into Game six, the players are in a stand-off.

In this game, black wants to move 12, 16 and 14 that are in the outer square into a mill. They have done quite well at herding in the outer layers and the centre square is filling up as sometimes occurs. White can stop black from moving 16 past g4, by lowering 9 to b2, which forces black to use 18-8-16 to deter white from closing the mill at F with black 3. 
In this way, pieces moved on the left side of the board can direct the movement of the opponent’s pieces across the right side of the board. This is an example of giving up position for initiative, as seen from black’s point-of-view.
It is almost always a bad move to form a mill on the edge of one of the inner or outer squares if doing so allows the opponent to make a mill at one of the cardinal points like in the above situation. If white obtains a mill at line 2 and black gains a mill at 4(efg), black will quickly surround white, negating their mill and obtaining a winning advantage. The only exception is if white were to create a second mill opportunity in the next move, but this is not always so. The best thing for white to do in the above game would be to move piece 17 down. 
Another tactic is to give up inner cardinal points to draw in a player’s pieces from the external square (or vice versa), increasing the proportion of one’s own pieces in the outer square. This occurred several times in game six and is how white ended up with three pieces in the outer square to black’s one piece. One must be careful when doing this to ensure the inner pieces are either alternating as in game six in the inner square or give the player (in this case black in the outer square) but not the opponent two pieces in a row.
In addition, some advanced players will play on the outer square until the inner square (or vice versa) becomes advantageous for them to play in because the player moved a piece that the opponent couldn’t force. If waiting for the opposition to make such a mistake, care must be taken not to repeat the same position three times, or a draw will be called.
A game can reach a kind of stalemate after players give up central cardinal points to stop opponent’s springs from pushing their pieces together, and now the inner and outer layers are full of alternating black and white pieces turning clockwise or anti-clockwise. In this case, it can be beneficial to rotate the pieces on the centre square as well. That is, it can be tempting to simply pass pieces from the inner or outer squares through the cardinal points, but on occasion it can be beneficial to move pieces clockwise or anti-clockwise in the middle square. However, this too can have unforeseen consequences.

11.2. Creating opportunities, then being patient
In the next game, we consider two different and additional opening styles. Black’s style is to ensure a potential double mill remains as an option for the second to the last placement, by creating many such opportunities. White’s goal then becomes creating many opportunities to close a mill in stage two during movement, hoping to end up with one remaining. The beginnings of each play can be seen in Figure 6 below. By delaying creation of a mill later in stage two of this game, white creates a more secure win.

Figure 106: Game seven. Black and white have different starting tactics.

Black has allowed white the option to create a mill on the outside square up till this point, but removed the option on the central square, while creating two places in the inner square where they would be able to form a mill in stage two. White’s moves are not without merit, but the situation is about to get beyond their control, with poor placement of piece 11. Here white shows ignorance of black’s intended tactics.


Figure 107: Game 7; patience is a virtue.

At the end of placement, as can be seen from the placement of pieces 17 and 18 in Figure 19, black had two options remaining to form a mill in stage two. White chooses to interrupt the inner square option, and black creates another on the right-hand side of the outer square.

Figure 108: Game 7. The end of stage one, black to move.

White will next move piece 1 right, followed by black 12. If black were to close the outer mill with pieces 16-4-18, then remove piece 13, they could chip away at white’s pieces, moving piece 18 between d1 and g1. But black knows that white must keep pieces 5, 15 and 13 in place to threaten closing a mill on the right-hand side of the central square. Thus, white cannot move these pieces and must move their other pieces. Piece 7 moves up and is followed by 14, 3 is followed by 8, 11 by 6. Piece 17 moves left and is followed by 10, and eventually white moves 15. Black then closes the left side mill and removes piece 13, where the game reaches the stage shown in Figure 109.

Figure 109: Game seven. Black has disabled their own mill opportunity.

In this game, by being patient, black has waited while white disables their own mill opportunity at B6-D6-F6. Black now has a double mill ready to quickly remove white’s three remaining mobile pieces for a win.
With the conclusion of this last game, a good understanding of strategic planning and purposeful response to ongoing game development has been described. Several opening plays can be attempted with an idea of how to adjust moves in response to the opponent’s developing strategy. The next step is to build on that knowledge, which will be done in part 2 of this book which describes more facets of the game in detail.


12. Part 2 – Mastering Morris
By now, the reader has a good understanding of the game’s foundations and a little bit of an insight into the complexities of this deceptively simple-seeming game. Now we start getting into the detail of play and investigate it’s parts. Later we will tie it all together with the start and end games.
12.1. How to win during placement
The ultimate aim of the game is to win, or at least to not lose. In that respect, one needs to be aware of how other players are trying to win. And the best way to win is quickly. Here is what you should be doing, as a general guide; it sums up everything we have learnt so far in this book. This may be common knowledge for more seasoned players but could still be beneficial to read for the people who are becoming better players, so I will include it here. These rules are general, and there are always exceptions.


    1. Take at least two of the center square cardinal positions and be able to fill the other two spots if they are vacated. Position on the board is very important later in the game.
    2. Place your pieces far apart for the first 6 pieces. Avoid making leading plays using 2 adjacent pieces until the placement of the final 3-4 pieces, unless attempting a starting play for white.
    3. Position, Position, Position. You should already have an idea of where you would like to be placed on the board, with every piece, and how you will use the potential those placements give you.
    4. Be aware of when to discard your plan.
    5. Understand the conditions under which you can break the “rules”. Such as when to allow your opponent to make cardinal or outer square mills.
    6. Understand which piece to take if you are forced to make a mill.
    7. Understand when to go on the attack, and start using the potential moves you have set up.
Know the difference between playing Black and White.

Let’s go over those points now..

12.2. Creating opportunities (Black)
Black ultimately only needs one potential mill to finish off in their last move. White needs two, due to the fact that Black can place last. For that reason, dead moves that don’t confer a potential to create mills should be avoided at all costs. This can sometimes mean allowing the opponent to create mills which we will get to in our exploration in to how to win.

But first, consider that all moves up to the about the 6th piece should be to create opportunities.

In Figure 110, the blue circles show where white may play or have pieces already placed without influencing black’s creation of potential mills, shown by the grey circles. These grey circles are the positions that black should not place in for their first 5-6 moves (given the actual places they moved), as they want white to place there so long as white does not have enough pieces to place in all the grey positions. This is why black needs to keep creating potential moves. The black circles denote places Black should place their pieces in the last 3-2 placements, and finally black may place in a grey position like d1 or d7, but not necessarily in a4 as it is already a potential mill, assuming black places in the a1 position.



Figure 110: Opportunities for black to create mills in the last placement.

This placement for black, or something else like it, depending on whether white makes a center square mill (this would determine how many pieces each player has yet to place), is ideal. This is because, if white places in one black circle in their next move, black can still win by placing in the other two, so long as white has no more than four remaining pieces to play. Given that black has placed 6 pieces here, white will also have placed at least six, so although this game is a generalization, it is a win for black.

As can be seen, black has not placed pieces adjacent to other black pieces for the first six placements, and that after these placements, the following ones will be adjacent.
12.3. Creating opportunities (white)
An ideal start for white may involve calculated misdirection or forced moves that black must make, with placement of adjacent white pieces as in the game to follow. This is because it is that much harder for white to finish with two potential mills in play. White needs two mills to be possible after their last placement because black still has one piece to place after white has placed their last.
    
Figure 111 White leads black to make placements, leading to a win.

Figure 112: Creating opportunities for white


In the above game, white starts directing black’s placements from their 5th piece (piece #13), first at a7 then c5 and finally placing at e3. It does not matter where black places their last piece as all are losing options, as shown by the red circles in the middle image. For argument’s sake, if black places at d3, white’s winning move is from a7 to a4, with the remaining moves included in the QR code in Figure 112 for importing into Sanmill..

And now you know how to react in one case when black plays a mid – placement center mill. We will cover this game play for white in extensive detail later in the book under the chapter on the Z mill. This topic was described  at the link below;

https://muehlespieler.de/x_uebungen/index.php?page=zmuehle

However we will attempt in this book to cover the Z mill again in a limited but useful sense that is easy(er) to remember.

12.4. When to discard your plan
There are obvious times to abort a plan, such as when the opponent is about to make a mill. For example, in the game below, white must place piece 15 in c3 to avoid a losing series of moves. In doing so, they interrupt black’s plans to move to a1 or g4. If black had allowed white to make a mill in the inner square at line c, they would lose because the mill would not be blocked and therefore would be able to reset and continue taking pieces.
        
Figure 113 When to discard your plan.

From here, white is able to move two pieces in three directions and still remain on a trajectory for a draw game. Assuming they move piece 15 from c3 – d3, if black does not move a single piece in a single direction, white will have an opportunity to make a move which could lead to a win. Black must respond to the potential mill at C during placement because there is no piece of either colour at d3. Were the white mill going to be constrained, black would have the option of responding at c5 instead of the requirement.

12.5. When to allow a mill in placement
There are times when it is ok to allow a mill, even times when allowing a cardinal mill is the correct option. Let’s look at some examples.

         Figure 114 When to allow a mill. (Generally true in most cases)

In the case on the left in Figure 114, if the mill would be constrained by a black piece at d1, the mill can be allowed. Adding a piece there later is considered a dead move, unless due to the placement of nearby pieces it creates opportunities for black. It may be ok for black to allow white to place their piece at g1 if it is their last piece, and black can replace any piece on the board which white removes, while still being in a winning position.

In the middle of Figure 114, where white attempts a dual potential mill at g7, Black should place at a7 as the mill on g in the outer square will already be held closed by the piece at d1.

In the figure on the right, where white makes a dual potential mill with the pieces on the board, black is better off allowing the cardinal mill at 4(a, b, c) instead of the inner square mill at c(3, 4, 5) because the cardinal mill will be constrained by the piece at a7.

To explore this further, we will look at the the game snapshots below, where we observe white’s error in playing to the outside square in an attempt to make mills. This is something black will benefit from. Black is already on a winning trajectory, with winning moves for black indicated in green circles. 

     
Figure 115: Making a mill can be a poor tactic

The only non-winning move here for black is to force white to play the mill, as seen in figure A. In the middle figure black has played the center mill, has their piece #13 removed by white, and plays the center mill again. Black continues to a victory on the right.

In this case, it did not matter if white created a mill because it would be completely blocked by black’s #4, #8 and #12. 

Quite often during placement, black can allow white to make a mill. Further in this book we investigate games where black and white both play aggressive games and do not block mill creation at all. But let us look here at a game in Figure 116 where white and black have two pieces left to place. If white places to e5, they will lose. The QR codes here will take the reader to the muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de website for further investigation and analysis. But essentially, white ends up in an untenable position if they form the mill. This is partly due to the other opportunities black has on the board, as in this case black will have a mill opportunity to close before white can arrange it’s mill on line 5.


Figure 116: Investigating Mill placement

On the other hand, in the game to follow in Figure 117, black will be on a winning trajectory if they stop white from forming a mill on line c in the game below at a similar stage during placement.


Figure 117 When to block the mill

The main differences are the opportunities available on the board, the blocking pieces which are present, and the number of opportunities which will be present versus the number of pieces left.. A player (usually black) can also ignore a threat to create a mill if the mill would be blocked by already present pieces. This is dependent on factors such as end placement patterns which are covered under that section soon.

However, it is usually not a good idea to leave two such situations on the board for white, where white can make a mill with two other pieces.

12.6. Which piece to take
This is a huge topic. In short, you want to take the piece, which is most inconvenient for the opponent to lose and which forces them to take longer to form another mill. However, it gets more complex than that. I’ll go over the basics. Better choices can only come from experience and more knowledge, particularly in mid-game or endgame scenarios. This will be covered in much more detail in the section on Mill Redundancy, but knowing which piece to remove from the board is as much an art as knowing a good starting play.

For now, let us discuss the following game in Figure 118 where black and white place to the cardinal positions, and White places their next two pieces in blocking moves to the inner square while black places to the outer square blocking positions, to piece #8 as shown below.


Figure 118: Which piece to remove

This is the setup of the game, where in the left and middle of Figure 118, white opens one then another potential mill. In the right image, white must place at a4 and black has only two good options for their final piece placement. Although this is an unlikely game start, if it occurs, it can be followed by the white player to good effect as a starting play. However, it is here only discussed in terms of piece selection. 

Figure 119: Which piece to remove - Sanmill import.



In each case when removing pieces here and in general during starting placement, it is best to remove pieces which the opponent must replace, lest they instead gain an advantage by placing elsewhere.

On the left of Figure 120, is the culmination of placement where if white moves from e3 to e4; black must respond by closing the mill at line g. If black remove the piece #15, as they have done on the right, their next move must be to close their mill at line 2. This is to avoid having white ending up with two functional mills to black’s one, and stresses the point of removing pieces which cannot be replaced.

If instead Black remove piece 9 from Figure A, and white moves piece #15 back to e3 or even piece 5 down as shown,  black should remove the common piece to both the potential mill at line 3 and 4, which is piece # 5. Not seen here, if white moved piece #1 to d7, Black could remove piece #13, as in this case it would be the common piece.

From this we see that it is not just the piece which is an active threat, but looking more long term, the piece with the higher value on the board, perhaps linking two mills that is the most important one to remove.


Figure 120: Which piece to remove

There are other concerns as well such as which pieces are blocking your mill as below in Figure 121.

The board above shows another example of this during midgame play. It might be tempting for Black to close the mill at line 2 and to remove the piece at f4, but that piece is replaceable by the piece at f6 which is otherwise not performing an active function. The piece at e5 is also not a concern and can be left where it is. It is much better here to remove the piece at d3, which is performing the function of blocking the mill.

Figure 121: Which piece to remove; one that cannot be replaced.

Determining which piece to remove is difficult, but in cases like the one below in Figure 122 which has occurred withing the first move from placement, it is best to ensure opportunities can be created. It is clear from the following two figures that black has two to four mill opportunities. What is not so clear is that white can negate much of black’s position with their double / diamond mill, so long as they remove piece #16. This will force black to assess which piece to remove in turn. Shown on the right, the correct piece is #3 as removing #1 will result in white being able to move #15 from d5 to d6 and back again for a victory.

Black should remove white #3, not #17 as this will allow them to open the mill at 4(e, f, g) with piece #4 without white interference.
 

In later play when there are fewer pieces on the board, it is best to remove pieces which can be blocked from pairing with each other, but in most other cases it comes back to opportunities. The player with more opportunities on the board will usually win.

Figure 122: Removing pieces; white must remove piece 16 on closing their mill, and black must remove piece #3 on closing theirs.

12.7. When to make a mill
This section should just be about aggressive versus defensive play. There are many occasions among games of mills where there is an option to either play a defensive move to block a mill or to play elsewhere to place pressure on the opponent and control another section of the board.

In the first place, it may throw your opponent off guard, as they are probably expecting you to move defensively and they may be planning on it. In the second place, it may be the best move. Take for example the case below for Figure 123 on the left, which is at the end stage of placement, with both white and black having one piece to place. There are two places available to white that are not losing moves, and neither of them is to block black’s mill.



Figure 123: To block or not to block? Aggressive versus defensive play. White’s move on the left and black’s move on the right.

Supposing white placed to e3 then removed black’s piece at g4, black now has some options for placement of their last piece. As can be seen on the right, if black places to b2, they would be interfering with their own ability to make a mill, crowding their pieces and losing mobility on the board. If they complete the mill at line 7, they can remove the white #13 feeder piece, making the White mill at line 3 more vulnerable. And in this case, they can place at c4 because when White moves from f4 to g4 with #3, taking black #10 from it’s blocking position, black can close the mill at line b. This will allow them to create another potential mill at 4(a, b, c) when they close the mill on line b.

In this case, if black were to remove any other piece, they will be on a losing trajectory. It is almost always better to have more opportunities on the board than your opponent, rather than try to win by closing down the opponent’s opportunities.
A prime example of aggressive play being preferable to defensive play is the battle lines game which will be discussed later in this book. There, black is better off letting white create even three mills, so long as it is left to create two and uses them wisely.
We will return to the beginning of the game in more detail when we investigate starting plays and their defense, but now we will look at when it is wise for black to make the center mill.
13. Mid-to-end placement strategy
13.1 Dead placements
Sometimes it can be difficult to determine where to place a piece, and a player places in a position that does not confer immediate or even eventual (timely) advantage. It is important to acknowledge that this has been an incorrect placement by the opponent and to take advantage of the board, as this is often the time to reap the benefits of the work you have done so far in creating potential on the board.





Figure 124: Investigating dead moves.

Take for example the above game in  Figure 124 which was a development of the Z mill play where white places to the outer square instead of consolidating on the inner square. The positions shown with grey circles show places that white can place in, in response to black placing the piece #12 to e4, without heading on a losing trajectory. Playing to a1 then c3 will keep Black busy enough that they can’t create another potential mill. Placing to d3 we will cover in the open Z mill investigation, and b2 is also an option as is g7.
 Everywhere else either has no advantage or will give advantage to black as with the move placing to g1 for Black on line a, where black is then on a winning trajectory. Lastly, placing to g7 would tie in with #3 and #11, forcing Black to respond to block White’s potential for a mill at line g instead of creating potential for Black mills on the board.

Any other move by white at this stage of the game, such as to those marked in red, will give the opponent a lead in the game. Indicated below in Figure 125 with green lines is the places black should place in response to white placing at the base of the arrow, and will put black on a winning trajectory. 

Figure 125: Black's responses to white making a dead move with little advantage gained in that move for white.

In each case, black is seizing the opportunity white has given them, and will be able to lead white into a series of moves with forced responses leading to black having  the upper hand at the start of the movement phase.

It is important for white to be using their last pieces to instead direct advantage or at the least to be directing black’s movements to areas that do not allow black to link up three pieces. However, especially for the player who did not make the ”mistake” moving to a dead space with no immediate potential, understanding the correct move to make to take full advantage can be difficult. We will cover it more in the section to come on end placement patterns.

13.2. Wrapping up mills
Consider the two games below, which we will cover in more detail later under starting plays. In the first case, White fills the gap that Black creates, to block the mill, but in so doing, it is blocking it’s own mill’s movement and essentially white is forced to choke itself. The appropriate response for white is to allow Black to create the mill at line 5, and instead block other potential moves by Black. But we will get into that later as well. For now it is enough to understand the concept.

The first image here in Figure 126 shows the play, the second indicates neutral or losing moves for white, the third is one potential outcome, with white tied up in a neat bundle. Those placements for white in the middle image are important for white to remember if making this starting sequence.



Figure 126: A Z mill response by black wraps up the white mill.

In the next figure, Figure 127, black intervened earlier with white’s Z mill play, and it is white who wraps black’s mill.

Figure 127: White wraps black's mill.

The above images show how white prepared for black’s intended center mill, placing piece 5 at c3. Black removes white’s piece at f4, and white attempts a mill beside blacks’ mill. Black responds by blocking it. 

Here, black plays piece 14 to d1, and white ends up in a good place with winning trajectories as long as they make their opening move so that they keep three pieces together while continuing to block black’s mills from opening.

13.3. Which mill to block
This brings us back to which mill to block when a mill will be created either way. While this was covered earlier, we will have a look at how to apply the concept in a game. When the opponent is sure to make a mill, the player should almost always block the mill which would be more free to move. There are exceptions but they are rare. Consider the two situations below, one of which was addressed above in the last section. Technically in these cases in Figure 128 it does not matter which mill is allowed, with both being neutral moves, it is still generally good practice in most cases to block the more mobile mill or the mill which could not otherwise be negated.


Figure 128: Which mill to block? Two games where it does not matter are shown.

In both games above, the move marked in blue, first for black then for white, will close off the mill which would have been open.

As a note for players hoping to create an opening game strategy, the predictability of this move, blocking the open-able mill, can help with planning traps.
An example of another exception to this general rule is below in Figure 129. The winning trajectory move for black here is to block the mill at line a to force white to remove the piece at line 7. This allows black to hold the mill at line 1 with piece #18, before opening the mill on line b while still holding white’s mill on line 1 closed. 

Figure 129: When it's not a good idea to stop the unblocked mill.

In the game-line following this start shown on the right of Figure 129, after a series of moves black arrives in a strong position to herd white to a win. It is noteworthy that white is completing this mill with their last piece; it often does not matter which mill is blocked by black in this situation, and they can often benefit by allowing white to do either, instead placing somewhere else to their advantage.

As discussed however, it is good practice generally to block the mill which would be most free to move, and allowing the mill which is most restricted, as in the game below in Figure 130. Admittedly, in this game, white has allowed black to create a potential double mill, black can actually block either mill and then win, the point remains. Black is better served by allowing the mill at line 6 rather than at line f, both due to the mill at line 6 being more blocked, and by the double mill opportunity it brings at line 2 and 3. One victory would just be easier than the other.

Figure 130: More on blocking dual potential mill options.

Again, the initial setup is shown on the left, the winning, neutral and losing moves for black are in the middle, and one potential outcome is shown on the right.

The game below in Figure 131 shows a setup where it really is important for black to allow white the more restricted mill, and all other options are losing moves. As before, the first image shows the setup, where white correctly responded to black’s dead move where they place piece 14 placed to no advantage by moving to f6. Lastly, if black allows the mill at line f, and white removes the necessary piece at b6, white will win, so long as they move piece 7 to d3.






Figure 131: More investigations. Which mill to allow.

Had black moved piece 18 to f2 in Figure 131, they would have had the option of closing the mill on line 2 and opening the potential of the mill on line 7, but in the variant on the right above, white can force them to temove either piece #7 or #11 instead.
Lastly, there are times when it does not matter if a player makes either mill, and it is best to block neither, instead setting up a potential mill instead. This can be done either as a sacrificial placement which we know will be removed, or as a future mill. 
This next series of images in Figure 132 cover the situation where white will make a mill with their last piece, but there is potential on the board for black to position three pieces together later. 

Figure 132: Ignoring white's dual potential mill when their last piece's position does not matter.

In this specific case, blocking white’s mill at either site (f2 or f6) would be a neutral move.
It is often beneficial for black to ignore this “last move mill” by white. Black can replace any removed piece, so it is wise for black to see if their pieces, as is, are good, or if the piece white will remove can be ignored, and another opportunity created instead.

13.4. Feeding your mill
A mill is only as good as it’s number of uses. For that reason, having a piece available to replace a removed piece is an important aspect of game planning. This allows mills to be sacrificed and the remaining pieces used again to either remain a threat or be sacrificed again or both. This knowledge can make selecting which of your opponent’s pieces to remove much simpler.
Consider the game in Figure 133, where white is about to make the first movement after placement. Here they can move piece #15 to d3, and when black closes their mill at line a, regardless of the piece removed, white is two moves from closing their mill again.


Figure 133 A shoot-out begins

White also has the piece at f4, and if they hold the mill at line c ready, black may delay opening (and losing) a mill. White can then potentially move to the inner square, and use piece #1 to create a mill at line e. The threat may force black to open their mills, instead of positioning other pieces.
Being able to feed a mill greatly increases it’s worth, and having that extra piece in the right spot can change the outcome of the game.

13.5. Right angle potential mills
Forming a shape with your pieces at the angles of a right angle triangle can be a good proposition, as it forces the opponent to remain in a blocking position. While this is not always the case it can seem that way and an opponent can be tricked into making the wrong move regardless.
The image below in Figure 134 shows the configuration. Here black is constrained from moving the piece at c5 as this would create the opportunity to make a mill.

Figure 134: Potential mills as triangles

Concerning the use of the three triangle pieces, we will explore the game below in Figure 136.

Figure 135: Sanmill import for the game in Figure 140

By placing #17 at d7, white creates the illusion of danger, and this creates more opportunities than placing at a7 or d5, where black can place in-between the three pieces. Actually the danger to black is only an issue if they lose the functionality of their mill. Indeed, even if black places at b6, if they open their mill too soon, they will lose.

Figure 136: Exploring triangles in a game.

Had black placed at a7, white will win by blocking the black mill and herding #18 and #16, which is why placing black’s #18 at a4 is also a valid move. If black had otherwise placed at d5 with piece #18, a very similar thing would happen.

The reader is invited to explore the above outcomes using the QR code for muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de below, with white and black having one more piece to play.


Figure 137: One more piece to play; Investigate using the perfect database.
We will see another example of using the right angle triple pieces in the next section under end placement patterns for white.

13.6. End placement patterns (black)
Recognising opportunities at the end of placement is important, both for taking advantage of an unbalanced opponent, and defending against an otherwise unperceived attack. The patterns here should be remembered, so that they are easier to spot during play, and the advanced player can plan their first moves accordingly, to take advantage of the unprepared opponent.
Whenever the last four to five pieces are remaining to be replaced, a good player is trying to assess if they can keep the opponent responding to forced moves where the response does not give advantage, ending up in a position of strength for the player, with either a final mill or final potential mill. This can occur even with the opponent creating dual potential mill opportunities such as those to follow.

In the game in Figure 138, white has made two dead moves very early in the game. In fact, their third placement put them on a losing trajectory. Black should now be going on the offensive, and indeed has 7 placements to make that will not give white the advantage at any time. 

Figure 138: End play placements for black.

These moves are the type that should be looked for. In each case, white does not end up with two pieces together to regain the initiative, and black ends up with two sets of three pieces that can move to become a mill, which makes white’s placement of piece 17 redundant.
See if you can locate black’s winning moves before proceeding to the next page or loading the game from the QR code below in Figure 139. Black has five pieces to place, and all can be leading moves that white must follow, without handing back initiative to white.

Figure 139: End play placements for the game in Figure 142.


Figure 140: End placement patterns for black, continued.

Firstly, black can move to e5, then b2, forcing white to occupy both f2 and b6. Then by placing to c2, white is forced to place somewhere in the inner square. Black then moves to g7 in a very strong position. Had black placed at e3 with piece 10, white would have regained initiative after black stopped white from forming a mill on line 3.

Two other ending patterns are given below. Black to move in each case, with two images showing the start and end of placement.

Figure 142: Starting moves for end placement win.


Figure 141: The end of placement, black to win.


Figure 144: Starting placement for black end placement pattern.


Figure 143: End of placement, black to win.

Many more patterns are there to be found. When the opponent blunders into a move or two that create little value for them on the board, count out how many pieces you have remaining and see if you can make the moves without ceding initiative, ending up with a winning placement.

13.7. White end placement patterns
White should also be on the lookout for end placement patterns, but with the concept in mind of having two fronts available which black can only block one of. 
Again, these end placement patterns are often evident after the opponent moves to a position which has no benefit, such as black’s placement of piece #12 to g7 below in .
In this case, black is unable to defend against the mill on line a and the mill that can form on line 1 at the same time. Additionally, the potential mill on line 2 for black is already heavily defended and with the other options available to white would not be enough to recover the game. Black lost the game above with three moves that did little to create opportunities or capitalise on them, but only if white keeps an eye open on their own opportunities. The game is available for import to Sanmill in Figure 145, and can be seen in Figure 146.

Figure 145: End placement patterns for white on the perfect database.


Figure 146: End placement patterns for white, game setup.

In the game in Figure 146, white can force black to place at f6, then g1 and remove that piece with the mill on line 1, as indicated in the image on the right. The QR code above will take you to muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de for further analysis and review. Some more end patterns to consider for white are included below, again there are two, each with the start and end of placement indicated;

Figure 148: End placement patterns for white; setup.


Figure 147: End of placement for white's end placement setup.


Figure 150: Another placement setup for end placement pattern.

Figure 149: End of white's end placement pattern.
Games can actually be won by white from very early on as piece #8 below, with a series of filler moves leading black from their fifth piece, as indicated in the game in Figure 151 and the game additionally uses the right angle placement discussed prior to this chapter in the final move on lines c and 4.


Figure 151: End game placement sequence from early in the game, leading white to victory.

In the game above, placements of black’s #8, and the position of piece #7 give white the opportunity to burn up black’s pieces for the remainder of placements as they respond to “mill attempts” by white which are intended to fail but occupy black and force them to respond on each occasion. The moves are available in the QR code below.

Figure 152: The Sanmill game import for the above figure.

13.8. Burning pieces
Continuing from above, there are several ways to burn up your opponent’s pieces other than just playing leading moves, and this can be used to good effect, just as in the game previous.
In the game below in Figure 153, white “burns up” some black pieces on the inner square, as seen in the middle game snapshot. White is then able to use black’s incorrect placement to e5 with piece #14 to force another dead move with piece #15 directing the placement of piece #16. From here, white forces piece #18 with piece #17 and is in a strong position entering the mid-game.

Figure 153: Burning up the opponent's pieces

Learning to notice these end – of – placement opportunities can significantly improve your game, giving you control over play that may otherwise have gone to your opponent. Try to be on the lookout for these opportunities, especially after your opponent makes a dead move or two.

14. Midgame tactics
Now we come to an end on piecemeal investigation of placement strategy and move into mid-game strategy during movement. Later, we will return to co-ordinated starting plays and revisit the end-game once more.
14.1. Cannon fodder
It is often very important to attempt to make mills that are simply targets to force your opponent to remove this piece instead of that piece, or in order to ensure the opponent’s mill can be blocked, or even to ensure the opponent reduces your pieces. Consider the game below which will continue into the next section on allowing mills during movement.
In Figure 154, white has managed to enter the movement stage of the game with three pieces that can be moved to make a mill on line 1. Black must move pieces #18 and #8 into position to threaten a mill at line 4(e,f,g), while knowing they will not succeed otherwise white could remove the piece at c3 and obtain another potential mill at line 3.
These kinds of situations are fairly commonplace in the mid game, and failing to make use of the principle can cost a player the game before the endgame is reached.

Figure 154: Investigating sacrificial pieces in Mills games.


Figure 155: The game moves for Sanmill import for the above game.

14.2. When to allow a mill in movement stage
Not all mills should be stopped. In continuation from the game above and as seen in Figure 156, black should next open their mill at line b. If white moves their piece #5 into the gap to stop the mill from closing, black can move piece #18 to g4 which will block white’s mill as well as giving black three pieces which can be moved together to form a mill.

Figure 156: When to allow a mill in movement stage.

If instead, by opening their mill, white forces black to remove one of it’s pieces (An alternate is to remove c4, d6 or f2 but black does need to close it’s mill. Here, removing d3 or e3 would cost black the game). White potentially loses it’s mill but remains mobile. If the option to remain mobile exists near the end game, it should be taken even if a mill is lost. This type of move is further discussed in the section on sacrificial mills.
As was already covered, some mills are better than others, and even if closing a mill will allow your opponent to create a mill, sometimes it is better to allow them to, and instead removing another piece of theirs that allows for a higher order of mill for yourself. Consider the game snapshot below in Figure 157, where black can close a mill on line a, and white is threatening a mill on line d(1,2,3). In this case, black is better off allowing the white mill and instead removing white’s piece at b4.



Figure 157: When to allow a mill to close. Creating sacrificial double mills or mills with feeder pieces.

14.3. Mill redundancy
In Figure 158 in the game below, black’s mill at line c is redundant. White does not need to block the mill with adjacent pieces as it has an open mill which is threatening to close as soon as the black mill opens.

Figure 158: Investigating redundant mills


Figure 159: The QR code moves for Sanmill import for the above game.

White is able to patiently wait until black is forced to open the mill and disable it, then confine the remaining pieces. When an opponent’s mill has been made redundant, patience is always a virtue. Take the time to prepare the board in this kind of situation, instead of rushing to close the open mill.

14.4. Mill abandonment
Consider the game board below in Figure 160, where white has a mill on line c. Black has four pieces not bound by the task of keeping white’s mill closed. White has five pieces that are technically able to move, but if white wants to herd black’s pieces, they need one piece as a stopper in the outer square and another piece as a barrier to black moving from the outer to the inner squares these are indicated below in blue. 
In this game, white is on the move, and will abandon its own mill, using the mill to hold black’s pieces while manoeuvring it’s remaining free pieces.

Figure 160: Mill abandonment during movement.


Figure 161: The Sanmill game import moves for the moves above.

The game above on the left begins with white’s move from e5 to e4, and white then herds black to the position shown in the middle image of Figure 160. Here, black’s best option is to make a mill on line 6, which later is forced to open and is blocked while white repositions. White patiently waits for black to abandon a4 where it then creates a double mill.
Abandoning one’s own mill can help tip the balance of power on the board to the player with the abandoned mill. The opponent is forced to remain in the position holding the mill closed, while your own pieces are unrestrained, and this makes a big difference on the board in terms of the balance of power.
14.5. Sacrificial mills
In the image in Figure 162, black should have placed piece #18 at d7, but the mistake allows us to look at the sacrifice of mills. Black is on the move and will move piece #8 to b2. For best effect, black might be tempted to remove piece #7, otherwise white can feed their mill as we just covered above, moving #5 or #1 back into position. In this case, the best move is a neutral one, where Black removes piece #3. All other options head to losing trajectories with a potential white victory. 
The potential mill at line 4(e,f,g) is sacrificed by black so that white must disable the potential for a double mill. White is then forced to close their mill at line 6 and remove piece #12 or #18. Black is then free to reopen their mill at line 2, and if White does not sacrifice their mill at line 6, Black can remove piece #17 and release the diamond mill, which of course can be used at least once to immediately close a mill, even when a piece is removed.

Figure 162: Sacrificial mills in the movement stage.

As long as each player keeps sacrificing mills, this game ends up somewhere like a 6 vs 3 endgame where black (3 pieces) has a chance of reducing white to a loss.
14.6. When to abandon a cardinal point
Consider the following game, Figure 163,where black abandons it’s cardinal points and does this three times to great effect. In each case, black abandons the cardinal position to force white into a more restricted position, with fewer options until the only options left are poor ones.
It is of note that white ends up occupying three cardinal points as well as the corner positions in a1, a7, and g7. Whenever possible, this author attempts to stay out of the far corners in a game like this. Although in this case the white player does not have any other good options.
  
Figure 163: Abandoning cardinal points.


Figure 164: The Sanmill game import for the game above and below.

In Figure 165, in continuance from Figure 163, white moves piece 5 up, and black immediately moves piece 4 down, trapping piece 15 in the corner. Piece 17, 9, 13, 5 and 7 can now be followed by their adjacent black pieces.

Figure 165: Cardinal point abandonment continued.

The next two times black abandons the cardinal positions are also to follow or force white into more restrictive positions. The game can be followed further by scanning the QR code in Figure 164, where black quickly moves to victory24.
Another good reason to abandon a cardinal point is to force a piece to move into the cardinal point which was blocking a trio of pieces from forming a mill.
As shown in Figure 166, if white opens their mill, black will fill the position and stop it re-closing. However, doing so will give white three pieces that are able to form a mill on line e.


Figure 166: Abandoning a cardinal point to link three pieces together.

Other reasons of course are to open and or close mill and remove an opponent’s piece. Vacating a cardinal point without a good reason can lead to a weakening of the player’s position on the board.
14.7. A list of priorities
In the midgame, apart from timing, both in regard to being patient when it is a possibility or in moving quickly when it is required, knowing which move to make or which piece to remove often comes down to understanding the hierarchy of the various possibilities on the board. This is an important concept to grasp and employ in the game, and ties together all of the concepts outlined thus far.
For example, one mill is of less value than two. Two independent mills are less important than a double mill (in most circumstances), but two independent mills are slightly better than an entwined mill. A mill with a feeder piece is better than a standalone mill, and best of all is a double mill with feeder pieces. Understanding this can help the player identify which piece to remove from the opponent; almost always the one that is most inconvenient to lose for the opponent, and which takes the longest to recover from losing. The longer your opponent takes to reform a mill, for example, the more time you have to prepare for it.
If you can’t take out an opponent’s mill piece and must close your mill for some reason, take out a feeder piece or the piece challenging your mill, but if you can wait for or prepare a better position before closing your mill, that is preferable. Then of course there are the extenuating circumstances on the board, and this may change the above advice. Consider the setup in where white is about to close their mill. They must, or black will close theirs and disable white’s mill.
White can remove any of the pieces in a1, b1, g4 in Figure 167 and disable black’s mill. In this case, neither one is more inconvenient than the other but often removing a1 in this kind of setup is more inconvenient; for example if black had another piece at d2.

Figure 167: Closing a mill; which piece to remove can be nuanced.

In the case that white removes black’s piece at g4, black will then move from e4 – f4 and hold white’s mill closed. If the board were different by a few more pieces (imagine another black piece at d3), black might then be able to rearrange their pieces into a mill.

In most cases above, it is better for white to remove the piece at b4. That way, black will close their mill and remove either a4 or c4 pieces to stop the double mill, and white can open their mill again.
Next, black will likely keep their mill closed while the piece at e4 is moved to d3 to become a feeder piece when black opens their mill, moving d1 to d2. This way they can be ready to form a mill one move after white removes their piece. This will force white to close their mill prematurely and black will open theirs. If both players keep the list of priorities in mind, this game becomes a stalemate.

Figure 168: The Sanmill game import for the game in "List of priorities".

Alternately, white can remove the black piece at d7 with their next mill closure and threaten a diamond at line 6 and d(5,6,7). But in this instance, yet again, it is better for white to create more opportunity for itself than it is to remove opportunity from black.

15. Opening plays
Now that we know a lot more about the board and it’s various microcosms and the relationships between linked pieces, we can return to the start and investigate planned plays in some depth.
The opening plays to be discussed definitely should be studied, if not memorised. They, or other plays like them, are very important to understanding aggressive plays and aggressive players as much as they help understand how to beat more timid or defensive players. Achieving the balance between blocking some moves and responding elsewhere with aggression is a skill well worth mastering. This author suggests that learning the following starting plays will help the player recognise similar patterns and circumstances in many other games than simply the ones described.

In later opening plays at the end of this section, we will transition to studying more defensive or obstructive games which can be best responded to with an attempt at stalemate.
	15.0. Man-to-Man Marking
In this game, each move by white is checked by black. Then in the later placement stage, white must be careful to move in the places indicated in the figure below. If white does this and avoids vacating the cardinal positions, but black does vacate them, they are very likely to lose.

Figure 168b Checking moves can lead to a stalemate, with a bad outcome for whoever vacates the cardinal position first.






Figure 16c – Sanmill game import

15.1. Black diamond
This is not quite an opening play, so much as an opening response. It benefits black to mirror white’s moves if they open in the way they have below in either the inner or outer square, up to the placement of the ninth piece. If white continues to “set up” and allows black to mirror their placements, the number of losing moves for white begin to increase. Shown are all the losing and drawing moves for white’s #11 placement on the right of Figure 169, as well as two outcomes of white placing to d1 with piece #11 in the middle and the right.

Figure 169: Black diamond response.


Figure 170: Sanmill game import for black diamond

Additionally, the number of losing moves for white are shown below with red circles in three different games below where black continues to mirror white’s placements, and where white doesn’t make any leading moves. When white does make a leading move, it should be from a diagonal line at say a1 or f6, or they will likely lose.


Figure 171: Black mirror game-plays.

As a point of interest, this author followed a great number of games where white placed their fifth piece in the incorrect position in the 3 games above, with variants where pieces 7 and 8 and 5 and 6 were either mirrored or alternating on the inner and outer squares. What follows is a general understanding for black to better respond to the incorrect placements by white.
In all of the games and move sequences stemming from a balanced game setup where white placed the piece #9 in a losing position, black needs to ensure they react in a patient manner. Black should attempt to keep two plays open during their middle three placements, especially if white closes one of their future plays. Their last three pieces should capitalise on the placement of the previous six. If white closes down options for a future play in one square, black should set another up on the opposing square (e.g. if closed on the inner square, open one on the outer square). And black should generally respond to white’s placement either in another square or on the other side of the board. 
 
By keeping spacings in most cases that allow for dual potential mills, black keep more options open that they can capitalize on. If no options can be created, a closure of an option for play by white should direct black to play the center mill, (but not usually complete it) and not usually beforehand. Ultimately, black should aim to maintain dual potential mills throughout the game placement, focusing on areas that white has not yet dominated. This keeps multiple options open and forces white into defensive play. Avoid overcrowding black pieces in one area of the board, maintaining spacing that allows flexibility and prevents white from easily pinching or blocking black’s pieces.
The game snapshot in Figure 172 outlines this process of pinching for a single game where white placed piece #9 in a losing position between piece 3 and 5, and indicates the next winning trajectory move for black at the head of each arrow, where white’s placement of piece #11 is at the tail of the same arrow.

Figure 172: Black's response to white 'pinching' it's centre mill options and responses to other dead move plays by white.

In cases where the lines b and 2 are pinched on both sides, it becomes a good move for black to play there. It is rarely an immediately bad move, even if white is not already on a losing trajectory, unless both lines a and c or 1 and 3 are heavily congested near the end of placement, and the resulting mill would be blocked. This seems difficult to comprehend, until one realizes these are dead moves followed by end placement patterns.
However, back to general cases where white placed piece 9 to a losing position. If white sets up a dual potential mill with two pieces, black should counter by creating one in another square. Black should respond to white’s attempts at forming a center mill but avoid completing their own center mill prematurely unless it provides a clear advantage, or white pinches both sides of a cardinal piece. Generally, use center mills as a diversionary tactic to force white into less optimal placements. During placement, black must play patiently, reacting to white’s moves without rushing into aggressive plays that could backfire by restricting future movement. Lastly, and to reiterate, ensure that at least the last three to four pieces capitalize on earlier placements (earlier if you can make it work), maintaining flexibility and forcing white into defensive positions.
 
To improve your mills game, you need to know good general game-play for when you do not know the board in play, and we have covered that already to some extent. Next you need patience and we have covered that as well. But finally, you want to know the board. To do this, you need to lead the play. This is white’s advantage. And if at all possible, you want to lead black into a situation they are not familiar with, one where the wrong play seems like the right one. 

15.2. Learning the Mill Rush
The mill rush is a good opening play to learn because of it’s simplicity. There are a limited number of outcomes, so it is easier to learn than some other opening games. In addition, it can teach the player about sacrificial pieces, feeder pieces, the items just covered just now, and other mid-game tactics which we covered earlier. And it can do that within a fairly easy-to-remember framework od game-board patterns.
      
Figure 173: The four main shapes of the mill rush for white; parallel and perpendicular.
Essentially, for the mill rush, if the opponent’s placement forces white to create mills in a parallel configuration, white should fill the mill at line 2 which black has created in the first four placements but otherwise should leave it open. This is because for the parallel configuration, black is surrounding white, and white is less mobile. In the perpendicular setup, white is more able to respond to black closing their mill, as black can only remove a free piece, and that will leave white with two mobile mills.
In the case of a t shaped top configuration (top right of Figure 173), white must be careful to take the left bottom corner with the 15th piece. In the offset parallel shown here (bottom right of Figure 173), white moves the last pieces to d3 and a1, but moving to b2 would also suffice, and is easier to remember; if the pattern is parallel, = fill the black mill at b2. If it’s perpendicular, + don’t.
Care should be taken with piece #15 in the perpendicular game in the bottom left of the four images above. If it is not there, black can place to the same point and will win. The game is provided below in Figure 174. All players should really know how to play it because it is black who chooses the parallel / perpendicular pattern, and if white does not protect the position, it is an easy win.

Figure 174: Losing the mill rush with misplacement of piece #15.
To follow, several iterations of the mill rush games will be given, along with the opening move suggestions. This author suggests playing them with yourself over and over to commit them to memory. Then each time a game is played and lost, go to the perfect database at
https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/
and see why it was a loss. There are more end variations that will occur than can be covered here, so the reader is encouraged to keep notes and play often.
Game 1a; parallel lines

Figure 175: Game 1a; parallel lines mill rush.

Black forces white into parallel lines so white fills the b2 position. If black plays piece #18 to b1, they will often open #2 and #8. If black attempts to make a mill at line 3 white should respond by opening theirs at line 5. White opens the double mill with lines 5 and 6, and if black removes piece #1 instead of #17, they can lose.
Game 1b; parallel lines (alt)
In this case, black fills the position at b2. If that occurs, they will likely remove the piece at a4. White should next move to a1, and move into position at d1 to stop black from reforming their mill at line 2.

Figure 176: Game 1b; parallel lines (alt) - mill rush

Game 2a; perpendicular lines
in this game, black forces white to the perpendicular position and white takes the place at d1 with piece #15, while black moves to d3. When white moves piece 17 to a7, black’s only non-losing move is to move 18 to g7 whereby they can then move 8 down and remove white’s 15. White should know what to do otherwise, because this author has never seen black actually make this move.
If black vacates f4, white should move 3 out to the right.



Figure 177: Game 2a; perpendicular lines - mill rush

Game 2b; perpendicular lines (alt)
If black attempts to complete the mill at line 2 in the perpendicular setup, they will lose as they no longer have enough pieces to block white’s mills. It is rare that someone does this.

Figure 178: Game 2b; perpendicular lines (alt) - mill rush

Game 3; extended parallel
Black forces white to place piece 13 in the outer square. Black forms it’s own mill and must remove pieces 15 or 17. This is usually a stalemate.

Figure 179: Game 3; extended parallel - mill rush

Game 4; alt extended parallel

Figure 180: Game 4; alt extended parallel - mill rush

This variation is a stalemate if white makes each move correctly. Otherwise, it is quite a smart play by black which can work in their favor. Shown are the safe moves for white, and for black if white moves to c3. 
There are a number of outcomes from this mill rush play by white and this book will not cover all of them. If the reader expects to be playing against some very good players at a tournament, the various outcomes could be studied. The mill rush is a great starting point to learning plays and will teach the learner much about correct placement as well as what to look out for during movement in terms of priorities on the board.

Black’s alternate responses
Black of course does not have to play white’s game at all. By playing to a4 and d1 as in Figure 181, keeping the mill at line 2 open and closing a mill at either line 1 or line a, black is in a good position to challenge white during the movement stage. This response can be used to good effect, and black may consider interfering with the dual potential mill with feeder piece which white will hastily employ in the current configuration. However, black can place to any position with the last piece except d7 where it would interfere with itself, for a neutral start.

Figure 181: Black’s alternate responses - mill rush attempt

A similar response shown in Figure 182 has a better trap for white in two places; by playing pieces #10 and #12 to d3 and c5, black interrupts white; then by playing to c3, white is offered a choice; interrupt the mill at line 3 or play elsewhere? Indeed c3 is the only choice that does not lead to loss. Similarly, if black plays the mill at line c, they must remove the piece at c3. 

Figure 182: A black response to a white mill rush attempt.

In that case, black should not then place at any of the marked (red) places in the middle image with their last piece. The QR code shows what happens initially to come to the image on the right, where white correctly leaves the mill at line 6 intact on the first move, instead moving piece #9 to d5 to threaten a diamond. Black can either respond by closing their mill and removing piece #9 or #17, and then the game is potentially even because white can get down to 4 or 3 pieces to black’s 6, and black has two or three mills to white’s one. The caveat is that if black removes piece #17 (not shown here), white must remove black’s piece #16 if all three black mills are closed when they close the mill at line 6.

Figure 183: Alternate black response to the mill rush.

15.3. Inverted Mill Rush
The inverted mill rush has much the same qualities and is played often enough that it should also be learnt. We will cover it three ways; one parallel and one perpendicular, as well as one victory for white where black does not place correctly, as we saw for the non-inverted game. In these two games, white plays first to d7. In a true mill rush play this allows more chance for interruption. However, the pieces end up in a similar place in this instance. The first game presented is the one with parallel lines.
Parallel lines – inverted mill rush.

Figure 184: Inverted parallel white lines - mill rush

In the inverted parallel white lines setup above in Figure 184, white again must stop the black mill on line 2, after placing piece 15 to c4. If black were to place piece 16 to b2 and correctly removes piece 15, piece 17 should be placed at either c3 or e3.

In the placement above on the left, because piece #18 is holding white 15 at c4, white moves 3 left and the two white pieces hold #18 at d3, whereupon black can move 6 down and upon making the mill should remove piece 9 or 17 as indicated in Figure 184 on the right in black crosses, depending on if white moves piece 5 down. If white moves piece 7 across to a7, they will lose. The correct move would be to move 5 down to fully surround and negate the black mill at d(1,2,3). However the losing game is reproduced below with exactly this mistake.

In this game, black uses the mill at line d(1,2,3) to pull white’s #15 piece from a defensive / protective position intimidating a mill on line a for black.

Figure 185: The Sanmill game import for parallel inverted mill rush - white loses.
Perpendicular inverted mill rush
In the perpendicular game below, black forces the placement of perpendicular lines as seen to follow. Again, the placement of white piece #15 is critical. If played correctly by both players, the outcome below is likely where white 17 pushes 18 past 3, 3 opens and black must close the mill with #14. 
Figure 186: Perpendicular inverted mill rush.

This is because otherwise if black moves 6 left in the image on the right above, white will move #5 down, threatening a mill. No matter if black removes one of the pieces; white will move piece 13 to d2, blocking the black mill long enough to redeploy a mill at line 7.

Figure 187: The game import for perpendicular inverted rush

At that juncture, white needs to bring #11 down and #1 right to threaten a mill on line f; then if black elects not to close the mill on line b, white threatens the vertical mill and can open their horizontal mill at the top of the board. Alternately, after black re-closes their mill, white can open their top mill. This play is shown in the game within the QR code, where white keeps threatening mills and black carefully repositions on the board, taking strategic pieces towards a stalemate where white encourages black to reduce them to 3 pieces but black declines. This strategy will be discussed more in the section on the endgame.

A white mistake;
If white does not move to c4, black can place there as in Figure 188, forcing white into a placement they must then vacate. Black can then block the white mill from opening and is free to dominate the inner square as indicated in the board and game below.

Figure 188: Inverted mill rush - a white mistake.

The mill rush is perhaps the easiest starting play to master, as it does not have many outcomes when played to a script. Investigation of branching plays and other game variations that are different can be fun and rewarding. One such game variation is shared below, up to the endgame stalemate without further comment.





Figure 189: The mill rush all the way to an endgame stalemate.

15.4. Battle lines
The astute observer may have noticed that most starting plays in the QR codes that start with the third white piece placed in the f6 position also entail white removing black’s piece at b4. Black then has the option of forming a mill at line 2 and removing white’s piece at f4.
Yes, as we discovered in the chapter on “A Gambit”, it is a trap. But it’s only a trap for the unwary.
While white simply need to keep creating potential mill opportunities, the same is true of black. There is no need to try to stop white from forming mills as black simply does not have enough pieces to be successful. But first let’s see what happens if black makes the attempt.
In the left image below in Figure 190, we see all the places white can keep attempting to set up mills after placing to d3. In the right image, we see all the losing moves black can make. The neutral moves for black are in the same places white wants to move, unless of course white has already moved there.

Figure 190: Battle lines game-play

First we will look at the game where black tries to block white and fares poorly. In Figure 191, the game progresses from the left to the right.

Figure 191: Black loss - battle lines

White simply has more potential mills for the game in Figure 191 so long as it keeps removing black pieces strategically, and black just has the one mill to work with. Consequently, white can whittle black down to three pieces while they still have seven remaining, and can easily trap white in a win. This process is described more in the section on the end game.


Figure 192: Battle lines- black loses, Sanmill game import.

Next, see the following game where black has responded aggressively and placed to the known neutral positions. Again the game in Figure 193 proceeds from left to right, with the game moves available in the QR code in Figure 194.


Figure 193: Battle lines - better response by black.


Figure 194: Battle lines, a better response - game moves.
If black is careful in the midgame to stop white from isolating its pieces, they can force a draw by getting white down to less than six pieces before they are at three pieces. This again is explained more in the end game section.

Three more starting placement variants for the battle lines beginning are shown below, with the losing and neutral final placements indicated for the last placement for white, where black also has one more placement.

Figure 195: Battle lines start variants

Practising and playing this game can give the player confidence in playing aggressively and being active in mill creation in an environment where blocked mills in the midgame are not usually something that has to be worried about.
Alternately, as seen in Figure 196, white can play to another position such as the side at a4 with piece #9. The winning moves are however more difficult to remember, and the game does not get played much, so there is an economy of reward that comes into play versus the time involved in committing the moves to memory. 

Figure 196: Battle lines; white to the side.
  
Again, interestingly, the places black should place next are the same places as the winning moves for white, with the basic premise being that white attempts to stay ahead of black with regard to creating mills, and black is better off playing very aggressively, sacrificing pieces to white in an attempt to end up with two mills.

Studying this game, which is all about aggressive creation of potential for black, can be beneficial and aid in developing a strong endgame.

15.5. The Z mill
The Z mill is a very extensively studied subject. This book will cover a series of initial moves from this point on (in great detail), and give the player of both white and black enough knowledge to avoid traps, and to reset sprung traps against most other good players.



Figure 197: The open Z mill

If white place some other areas, black can follow a victory trajectory by playing from white‘s placements, following the arrows above.

If white does place piece #11 at e5, all following next movement options except one will result in a loss trajectory. The position shown at d1 becomes understandable when the game plays out. The next moves for black are shown below, with green arrows extending from the white positions to the black. Note that in only one case is the proper move for black‘s piece # 14 to complete the mill at line 5, where white has moved to d7. If white moves piece #11 to c5, black has a very good chance at victory.

The moves shown on the right for black should make more sense now. When white makes a dead move, black should go on the attack, making a series of end placement moves. As well, if white makes a leading play, black should block a mill.


Figure 198: Black to victory in closed z mill

If black wraps up up the white mill, they are in a good position. To avoid this, white needs to place at b2 and d1 as soon as black moves to either c5 or e5 with piece #10. The game is followed through in one trajectory below in Figure 199, where the games enters a stalemate. The moves are provided in the following QR code.

Figure 199: Closed z mill – stalemate


Figure 200: Closed Z mill, correct responses leading to stalemate.

In the game in Figure 199 and carried out in Figure 200, black fills the mill on line 5 when white places to d1 with piece 13. White’s piece #17 must move to block the mill in the moving stage, so must be placed at e3, and black’s piece #18 can be placed anywhere.

15.6. The open Z mill
A variation to the Z mill is where white does not place to b2 with piece 9, instead placing adjacent to the piece that could form it in the future.

Most of the time, black players will not fill the mill’s position in b2 as it is usually better to keep making more potential mills and not using the potential early in the placement stage. It happens to not always be true in this case. The placement of black’s piece #10 does not matter so much. Regardless of where black places it on the outer square, white can then place piece #11 to d3 or some other point.
15.7. Z Mill, white c4 to d3
While the white to d3 game does not lead to immediate sequences that will lead to victory, there are many chances for black (and white) to make incorrect choices during the midgame. In the situation where black moved #10 to d7, we see the following in Figure 201.

  
Figure 201: White to d3, open z mill.

As seen in the left figure above, no matter where black places on the outside square, white can place to c3 and form another mill. If black places to the inside square, white can still attempt a mill which black will stop, but then white should place to g1 and attempt another potential mill with the piece at f4.

Indeed, the only time white should not attempt to play out the potential mills in the inner square in this case is if black pinches the mill at line 6 with pieces at both d5 and d7. In that case, white should immediately place to g1 for the potential mill at line g and 4 as seen on the right of Figure 201.
Figure 202: Open Z mill, black mill on line 5

Progressing the game further in Figure 202 above, if black places to e4 with piece 14, white should not block the mill at line 5, instead placing to a1, e3, or g4. Assuming e3, if black removes the piece placed at e3 after completing the mill at line 5, white must block the potential mill at line 2 with their last piece, and move piece 3 in the first stage of movement. Anything else will result in a loss for white. White then can start forming a mill on line 3, and black must threaten with a double mill by moving 18 up. White can still close the mill and remove black 8. White now has two mills, one with a feeder piece. Black must play their own mill and remove piece #1. 

Figure 203: The Sanmill game import, open Z mill,
There are many other traps; the following QR code shows all the correct moves but what do do when the opponent makes a mistake can be studied on the perfect database.

This starting play can be a minefield for the unwary, and rich ground for the well informed who know how to thread the needle through all the losing moves. Better yet, when the correct winning moves are studied for each losing move, the reader can learn much about the game.
Black does not always play to wrap white’s mill or make their own mill on line 5. Many times they place elsewhere. In the left game board in Figure 201, white was triggered to initiate a single potential mill by black placing piece #12 to c5. If black places to the outside square here, they can lose. The correct response for white to black’s moves into the inner square are shown with grey arrows.


Figure 204: More variations to c4 d3 Z mill

As seen in the middle of Figure 201, white can place at a4 near the end of play. It is a bad move earlier on, leading to a losing trajectory.  If black then completes the mill at line 2 and removes piece #17, white needs to open their mill inwards to remain with a chance of victory, then move this piece to e5.
 These games should be studied if the c4 – d5 move is played, as if black does not make an error in placement, white’s initial moves can be counter intuitive. While this game can be difficult to play as white, the middle game offers many incorrect choices for black, and in all likelihood, they will not be sure of the board.   In the right of Figure 73, black filled the position at b2 to complete the mill at line 2. Black effectively pinches the mill at line 6, stops the play to the inner square with a half wheel, forcing white to use another piece. In this case, white can place at g1 and only has one move available at the start of play, to block black from opening the mill at line 2 and drawing whites’ #13 down to the cardinal position. This would free their piece #16 to move towards a mill at line e, forcing white to move #3 and allowing black to open their mill at line 2.

To summarise, if white plays to c4 and d3 with piece 9 and 11, they need to be very well informed. It might be enough to ward off the unprepared from making this play; even just the knowledge that in any Z mill play where black plays to make a mill on line 5, white only has a few options to avoid starting on a losing trajectory, can be a great help. Figure 205 shows what happens when black places piece #10 at e5, with all the losing placements for white shown in red circles. The placement of the neutral trajectory placements should be familiar, as they are same as for the closed Z mill. If black places to e5 with piece 10, there is an additional neutral position available to white at e3, which can be the next move for black and will put them on a winning trajectory. This placement is important, especially for black who can fare well with the knowledge.

Figure 205: Black playing line 5 after z mill
Of course, we cannot explain every possible Z or open Z mill game in detail. There are far too many!! However, we will cover one such game in high detail as we did for the mill rush, and funnily enough, it uses the placement of piece #11 to e3, one of the only safe spaces in Figure 205.
Following are the correct and incorrect placements for white’s seventh piece (13), given some common placements for black. QR codes are given, along with draw game options for white, but there are many pitfalls for black if white knows the right moves.

  




The only valid move for white (13) is g1.





White should not block the mill, but instead play c3 or another inner square option






White either needs to create another mill on the centre square, or close black’s line 2 mill.







White can make black expend two pieces in the inner square at e5, block line 2 or play line 1. Black must close the mill in the game in the QR or they can lose.




White can force black to play e3 and c3, or block line 2, or play line 1 at a1






White has many options but if they don’t block black’s mills need to ensure their own mill(s) is/are not blocked and their pieces can assemble in the endgame as they are being removed by black.

To summarise the presented starts previous couple of pages; if playing this starting pattern, care must be taken. Knowing how to respond to black’s many varied options for placement can be difficult, but learning the correct responses can be rewarding.
15.8. Z mill, white c4 and e3
This author has done a lot of research and played many hundreds of games for the following play, where the basic thrust of the game is a mixture of the intent from the mill rush and the battle line game, but within the framework of the open z mill. The basic premise of the first moves are revealed in Figure 206.

Figure 206: White Z mill; c4 and e3

Eleven of the most common games this author has encountered from human players following these moves will be detailed below along with QR codes for the setup and the correct opening moves, along with a short paragraph in explanation. 

The move has some strengths in that the opponent’s moves are quite predictable and usually follow the same patterns. More than that, the placements required usually make immediate sense and are therefore fairly easy to remember.


Game 1; parallel mills

There are two completed white mills and two almost completed black mills. Placement of black piece # 18, here at d7, does not matter. Black is down two pieces. White should move out from the right-hand side then up, or up on the left. If black closes a mill here, they are still on an even footing with white. If black closes the mill at line 5, black should not remove piece #3.

Figure 207: Game 1; parallel mills

Game 2; Ring round the rosie

Black counters by directing white to place piece 13 at c5. White needs to respond by placing next at d1, then g4. If in this game, piece #16 is placed at b2, white should place piece #17 on the inner square and should not move piece #3 from the cardinal position, instead abandoning piece #8. If black places #16 at g4, white must place #17 at b2. If the mill at line 6 is left un-stoppered, white can open it, and if black removes piece #7, can form a mill at line g for victory.

Figure 208: Game 2; Ring around the Rosie

Figure 209: Sanmill import for round the rosie


If black instead places #18 to d7 as is common, white must move #15 up and can aim for a mill with #15, #3, #17.

Game 3; all along the watchtower

Here black attempts to wrap up white in its own mill by playing to the top at line 7, however white interject with piece #13 at d7 then can threaten a mill at lines e and 4(e,f,g). 

Figure 210: Game 3; all along the watchtower

If black follows convention and stops the cardinal mill and allows the mill on line e, white can enter the movement phase on a winning trajectory by removing piece #8. It does not matter where black place their last piece at that point; losing moves are shown in red and include the replacement of piece #8.

Game 4; Wrapping in black

Black places piece 10 at e3 which derails the start early. White should place #11 at e5. Black invariably plays the T at line d(1, 2, 3) and line 3 and removes #9 from c4 and white replaces it. Black can only place their second to last piece at either a1 or a7 (top left of Figure 211), otherwise when white places #17 to b2, they should win. This partly has to do with the ability of white to open the mill and herd black. As a first move, white will move #11 down, then either #1, #3 and #13 can make a mill, to name just one outcome.


Figure 211: Game 4; Wrapping in black

If black wastes their move, placing #16 to the outer square as in the top right, white can force piece 18 as in top right, and employ the double mill. Black will close on line 2, removing #1.

If black places to b2 themselves as in bottom left, white can threaten a double mill at lines 5 and 6, and when black blocks it they will generally lose. 

If black places #12 to d5, white must place to either c3, b2, d1. If c3, next must be d1. If black then moves to g4, white must move #17 to a4

These are only several of many outcomes from black placing #10 to e3, but while they have been addressed, they are (prior to publishing this book at least) quite rarely played. QR codes are not provided for this game variation because the author hopes not to have to learn the responses when people who read this book play him..

Game 5; Perpendicular mills

In this game, black’s response allows white to create a second mill at line b. In this case, white’s first move is on a winning trajectory. If black opens the mill at line 2, white can open the one at line 6 and lose it, then open the one at line c, removing piece 8 if black’s mill is reopened.


Figure 212: Game 5; Perpendicular mills


Above is the game start on the left and a likely outcome on the right.

Figure 213: Sanmill import for game 5; perpendicular mills


Game 5b; a shoot-out

Black does sometimes play piece 18 to b2 in the above scenario, then remove white piece 17. In this case, white should open their mill (at line 6 or both mills) and remove the piece at d3 to be on a winning trajectory. Black will close the mill and remove piece 11, which would otherwise feed the mill on line c, but this is a losing move. Better for black to have forced white to open both mills and remove piece 11.  White then reopens the mill on line 5 to block black, either for the win or  a draw.


Figure 214: Game 5b; a shoot-out
The image above shows the correct move for black’s midgame after placing piece 18 to b2.

Game 6; misdirection

Black uses piece #10 to close the mill at line 2 and removes piece #9. White replaces it. Black plays to d3, white d1. At this point, black’s only neutral move is to place piece 14 to d7. Even if they do, and white places #15 to e5, there are still many losing moves for black, who should threaten a mill on line 7 and then stop white forming a double mill in the center square.


Figure 215: Game 6; misdirection


Figure 216: Game 6; Misdirection, Sanmill import.

Game 7; cut the bottom out

Black interrupts white by forcing them to d3 with a placement to d1. White follows by placing to g4 and then a1 to threaten a double mill at lines 6 and 7. This forces black to place on line 7 with their last piece. White then needs to block black from using #2, #8 and #12 to form a mill at line 1. If black closes the mill and removes piece 13, white needs to remove piece 12 to cancel the threat. The game shown then leads to victory.

Figure 217: Game 7; cut the bottom out

Game 8 – two L’s

Black moves #10 to the outer square, and white makes two parallel mills. If black does not make the outer potential mill with piece 18, they will lose. If they do not, white should move #17 down, not #1. Then white simply has two mills to black’s one. If black does make the outer potential mill, it will be a sequence of mills chipping away at extra pieces, and will move to an end game.


Figure 218: Game 8 – two L’s


Figure 219: Game 8 – two L’s



Game 9 - Hangman

A difficult game to play. Black disrupts every move by white but white keeps forcing black to move. Even though black and white each only have one mill, if black lifts piece #6, and white lifts #17 to a7, black may be tempted to make the mill on line 2. This is a losing move. Piece 13 can replace #17 while black’s mill is held closed.

Figure 220: Game 9 – Hangman

Alternately, if black moves #16, white can move #1 down and white can join #3, #17 and #13 in a mill.

Figure 221: Game 9 - Hangman

Game 10; perpendicular mills

Black places piece #12 to c3, which is a dead placement and white plays out the mill at line e and 4(e,f,g), and fills the spot at b2. Black sets up a potential mill on the right outer square. White begins by moving piece #11 at the opening of the game and is on a winning trajectory

Figure 222: Game 10; perpendicular mills

Game 11; Roof falls in
Black starts creating a mill on line 1, and white responds by playing along line 3 and forcing black to place at e4 by placing at e5. White must be careful with removing the correct pieces during the game. 
Figure 223: Game 11; Roof falls in

Summary of the Z mill c4 e3 game;

These are just some of the more common games that result from the opening moves to this particular play. The advantage to white is that the required responses are understandable and not so abstract. They are therefore able to be remembered and employed. Many of the approaches are not too dissimilar from the battle lines and mill rush games, so it is not uncommon for one games to start resembling those.

Quite often, these games are either a stalemate early in movement or long, getting all the way to the endgame and thus test the player’s ability across the entirety of game-play. There are therefore plenty of opportunities for mistakes for both players.

To win against this move, black should place piece ten at c5. White must then abandon c3. If they do not, the process in Figure 223a (or one like it) may transpire, with a victory for black.

Figure 223a Black wins against white when they place at e3 following black’s placement at c5

Here black appears to commit to the mill on line 5, but only plays to d5 if white stops the mill on line 2 (not shown). The middle image for Figure 223a shows the particular winning, losing and neutral placements for black’s last piece, as well as the winning piece removal. One winning trajectory for black is contained within the QR code.

Next we will look at some games that can be encountered when black interrupts the z mill instead of wrapping it up afterward or doing any of the things we have covered thus far.

15.9. Z mill interrupted
There are several methods to bypass the Z mill, affectionately and colloquially termed the bastard plays. Each of the three main types shown below deserve a discussion, as they are quite often used. A discussion of each will follow.
Figure 224: The bastard moves. Z mill interrupted.

 15.10 Black L, white wrap
The first board on the left in Figure 225 is generally played by people who intend to form a mill on lines b or 2, and this can be prepared for by white placing piece #5 at c3.
White can move piece #7 to f2, which is removed by white and replaced. Now, if black thinks to stop white wrapping the mill by moving to c5, they will be on a losing trajectory, shown below on the left. However, they usually move to f6.
Figure 225:  Black L, white wrap

If white follows with a move to c5, black may block the mill and white in turn can do the same with piece #13. At this juncture, black does not have many good options, with only three moves leading to neutral outcomes.
If black moves to d5 as in the middle board in Figure 225, white should take care, as they now have many pieces which are locked in place and the remaining placements should maintain mobility.
Given the example in the middle above and following to the right-most image in Figure 225, white maintains mobility then moves piece #15 to e4. If black follows, all the inner pieces rotate anticlockwise, and black will often pause before moving #14. If they move #18, they are on a losing trajectory.

Figure 226: Sanmill game import for the preceding game

If black moves piece #14 left, then white moves #17 left, moving # down would be a losing trajectory also. If #18 is moved up, #3 can go left, #17 back, and black is losing again.
Of course, a good black player will have investigated the moves that can help them win if white does this move, or may simply not try to make a mill on the inner square, or do so and not block the white mill, or any other move. In this case, the reader will need to draw on their experience to formulate a response.

15.11. Black into white
It should be said that black must move piece  #6 to f6 in the game in Figure 227, otherwise they will be on a losing trajectory already. Also, white can try to wrap up black’s mill as they did in the preceding section when black moves to b6 with piece #4, and it will work in much the same way. 
If white places to c3 with piece #7 as in the middle board below, then black places to b6 and c4, black are on a losing trajectory; the correct move for white then is to block the mill as per the middle image below, then white just needs to keep black busy during placement while building a mill on line g.
Figure 227: Black into white

If black avoids making a mill or potential mill on line b and instead makes a mill on one of the outer edges, white can prepare by taking the diagonal points in the inner square and simply let them, as seen in the right image in Figure 227. If black played the mill on the right image and must select the correct piece to remove; the wrong selections are indicated in red, with two options continuing on a neutral trajectory. In most of these games, white should concentrate on the right hand side of the board, leaving the area around b4 undeveloped even if placed in. 

When black plays the “into white” z mill disruption move, white must be careful when attempting the same things they attempted in the mill rush and z mill scenarios. There are a few scenarios where white can make mills, and we will look at them. However, care really must be taken, as will be seen. The following text will refer to Figure 228

Figure 228: Into white, a discussion

Firstly, let us look at white moving to e5 with piece #7. If black attempts a mill on line b, white should let them (without blocking the mill), and launch a mill rush of their own, which is usually successful. If black should start making a mill at line b but not complete it, white should plug the gap with their last piece in most cases, unless by way of leading moves white can keep black busy enough to keep a mill free to open up. If black responds by placing to e4 here shown in green white can go ahead and attempt the mill at line 5 and d(5,6,7), succeeding on either line. A line 5 mill outcome has some challenges and the game is reproduced without further comment below. Here the QR link is to the game on https://muehle.jochen-hoenicke.de/ for the reader’s inspection.

Figure 229: Into white, black e4, white mill on line 5
If black however moves to d5 with piece #8 as shown in Figure 228, white should abandon the attempt to create a mill on line e or 4(e,f,g). Any play down line g shown with a blue line will go badly. In this situation, white can move to the other side and corner of the board, placing to a4 then d1. If black plays to d1 or d3 here (not shown), white can now use the potential in piece 7 and 3, placing at e4, making a mill and removing piece #6. If black places piece #10 to d7 (not shown) and then between the two white piecs as indicated in a black circle, white then moving to b4 is an even stronger move. 
In another situation where black places #8 to d7, then places pieces #10 and #12 in non-threatening or leading positions in the inner circle, white following by placing to a1 becomes a strong move, as indicated in green in . Indeed, even for some leading placements from black in the inner square, white is in a good position to make leading moves for the remainder of placement as shown in the middle board below and finish placement in a strong manner.

Figure 230: White to a1

Figure 230a Sanmill game import
The same is also true of a black placement of piece #8 to g4 as indicated in Figure 231. White can only play a mill to the line at 7 or d(5,6,7). And there are some limitations; if playing the line 7 mill, white can play piece #13 to c4, and if white makes a mill at line b, two of several correct (neutral) moves for white with piece #17 are shown with grey arrows, depending on which white piece is removed. In each case, white can protect against the black mill opening, and if black blocks white’s mill at line y by moving piece #18 to a4, white can threaten a mill on line 3.

Figure 231: white makes a second mill, line 7
If white is allowed to, they should play for a mill on line a as shown in Figure 232, especially if they can remove a piece like shown below, where piece #8 is removed. Black replaced that piece in this game with #16, and white then places #17 to c4. Even if black moves to e5 with #18, their mill’s effectiveness is reduced by white moving piece #9 to b4 and forming a supported mill, especially with the potential mill at line 7 if white removes piece #16 from d7.


Figure 232: White mill on line a.

Against some black players, white will end up in a game like the one in Figure 233, where both players have blocked each other. In this game, as in others like it, the player hopes that the opponent will make a mistake but it is possible the game will end in a draw. 


Figure 233: A draw from the into white start

In the movement stage of a blocking game, the business of giving or taking cardinal points, of not moving pieces that can be forced apart by adjacent pieces, and keeping your own pieces out of the corners (marked in red x’s) takes focus. Meanwhile, you seek to find an equilibrium point where the pieces simply oscillate between almost- bad plays in small gaps beside opponent’s pieces that have been forced into immobility on either side (purple). 

Figure 234: Mid-game; a quagmire

Some circular (blue arrows) or oscillatory movement options can often be available down a diagonal along the corners of the successive squares shown below in the top right. These are difficult games, and many players find their niche here. Unfortunately there is not much more advice this author can give in this type of game, except to go for a draw. Aimless moves result in loss as often as not.

15.12. Black away from white
This can be a fairly risky move from black. Shown in Figure 235 are three outcomes from black playing piece #4 to f2, indicating the losing moves for black for two placements of piece 6 where white next places to c4 with piece #7, and the winning move for white for another.
Figure 235: Black away from white

Despite the risk, this play by black is a rich area to explore. Perhaps if black can weave the needle through some of these neutral placements, they can lead white into a perfect trap, such as shown in Figure 236 where white attempts a centre mill that black has prepared for with piece #14, which was replaced with piece #18. The problem is it assumes white will make a mill when it is a bad move; but better to be prepared for anything.


Figure 236: The risk pays off

In this author’s opinion, the games following black’s response with piece #4 placed to f2 are not strong in terms of starting plays; these plays do have a rich midgame, and we have covered that extensively in preceding sections in the book. As such, we will move to the endgame discussion.

15.13. Investigating starting plays on your own
These plays are just a small number of the possible game beginnings, but they are commonly played and are good to know at least a little. If they are known well, the player starts encountering their own limits much later in placement or even in mid movement, and their skills will only continue to develop.

If the reader investigates their own play where they know almost every move, from some other starting position where they have a fair amount of kept initiative, they can reap the rewards by dragging their opponent into unknown waters. It is suggested to perform an initial analysis such as was done for the open Z mill, white to c4 – d3 previous, then following up by memorising the most played games extending from that known start as was done for the section on the open mill, white to c4 – e3. If a player does this, they will find their game and their MElo improves considerably.

16. The end game (revisited)
16.1. End game priorities
As a player moves past the mid‑game and approaches the end‑game (which can come on quite abruptly as one player decides to close a mill which causes a series of cascading mill actions), they will want to aim for specific tactical and structural opportunities. With fewer pieces on the board, mobility and control of key intersections become more important than simply forming a single mill, so a trained eye looks for positions that either restrict the opponent’s moves or force them into predictable paths.
In practice this often means steering toward configurations that create double threats (two potential mills at once), stable “anchor” pieces that are hard to attack, and move cycles that let you repeatedly open and close a mill without giving the opponent the same luxury. As the piece count drops, you should also track whether the position is drifting toward a forced draw or a technical win: end‑game priorities shift from speculative attacks to concrete plans, such as locking the opponent’s pieces on one side of the board or engineering a zugzwang where any legal move worsens the opponent’s position.
16.2. Examples of zugswang
Zugswang, comes from the german word meaning  'compulsion to move'; pronounced [ˈtsuːktsvaŋ]). The earliest known use of the term zugzwang in English was on page 166 of the February 1905 issue of Lasker's Chess Magazine 25
In Chess, Zugswang usually occurs in the endgame, and is when you can move but every move you can make ends up with you being worse off, by losing a pawn, allow the opponent’s king to penetrate or entering a forced check-mate. It would be better in fact if you could skip the move. See below the classic king and rook versus king end-game26.

Figure 237: Zugswang in chess

This also occurs also in Mills, where a player is forced to move a piece which will lose them the game. For example, in a 7 or 6 vs 3 game, the player with fewer pieces may have to vacate a position with either of their remaining pieces, all of which will hand the opponent the victory. Most of these arrangements will be described below.  
16.3. 7 vs 4
To win with seven pieces against four is usually easy. The requirement is to remove one piece when in position to have three potential mills created with six pieces that capture the remaining three pieces, and then to move the seventh piece. The player with three pieces is forced to vacate a blocking position and gives away the game.
These arrangements are shown to follow, and most are also described on the https://muehlespieler.de/ site, at the link in the QR code.

Figure 238: 7 vs 4 game patterns at https://muehlespieler.de/

If these patterns can be memorised, the player can head toward them as they approach the correct number of pieces.



Arrangement 1

Figure 239: 7 vs 4 (1)
Arrangement 2

Figure 240: 7 vs 4 (2)
Arrangement 3

Figure 241: 7 vs 4 (3)

Arrangement 4

Figure 242: 7 vs 4 (4)
Arrangement 5

Figure 243: 7 vs 4 (5)
Arrangement 6

Figure 244: 7 vs 4 (6)
Alternately, depending on the arrangement of the pieces for the player with 4, the player with 7 pieces may be able to herd the remaining pieces together and trap them. It helps if the remaining pieces are restricted to two squares, so this should guide which pieces to remove when there is a choice, It can also determine which pieces to force the removal of, if you are a player who will soon be playing with 4 pieces.

16.4. 6 vs 4
Generally speaking, a player with 6 pieces will have a hard time trying to pin down a player with 4 or 3 pieces, as the seventh piece makes all the difference. The exception is when the player with 6 pieces is able to open two potential mills in the same move; the opponent is unable to fill both and lose. Some of those arrangements are shown below, and most only require the use of 5 pieces; three that form a mill, and two nearby that are usually a mirror image of the ones that will not move, although that is not always the case. The remaining, sixth piece is required to form an additional potential mill.
Arrangement 1

Figure 245: 6 vs 4 (1)
Arrangement 2

Figure 246: 6 vs 4 (2)
Arrangement 3

Figure 247: 6 vs 4 (3)
Arrangement 4

Figure 248: 6 vs 4 (4)
Arrangement 5

Figure 249: 6 vs 4 (5)
Arrangement 6

Figure 250: 6 vs 4 (6)

The astute observer will realise they are much the same as in the previous section for 7 vs 4 games. In other words, they are arrangements you should be aiming for near the end game.

Alternately, herding can sometimes be achieved by the player with 6 pieces, as long as the pieces of the player with 4 are restricted to two squares like in the game in Figure 251



Figure 251: Endgame herding

However, while the opponent is attempting to herd, the player with four pieces now wants to lose a piece, and can force the opponent into allowing one of the four pieces to escape. For example, see below in Figure 252 where black is on the move, and will use the arrangement of white pieces to inhibit white. Black can move the piece at d1, forcing white to complete a mill or release one of the remaining pieces.

Figure 252: Black uses white's pieces to against them

If these aforementioned special circumstances cannot be arranged, the player with 6 pieces is better off allowing the opponent to remove three of their remaining six pieces so they only have three left.  Experienced players will generally refuse to do this, and  a draw will be offered.
16.5. 4 vs 4
The player who gets to 3 pieces first generally has the advantage, excepting a few arrangements that are detailed in the puzzle section of this book. For that reason, when experienced players are both reduced to four pieces, a draw is generally offered, as explained above.
16.6. 4 vs 3
The player with 4 pieces would like the opponent to remove his fourth piece when he has a mill formed, so that he can turn the mill into a potential double mill and win the game. So, the 3 pieces player has to pin down that fourth piece, and force the mill to be opened.

Next, the 3 pieces player needs to separate the four pieces, and the player with four needs to either keep 2 groups of two able to make a potential mill, or one group of 3 able to make a potential mill, with the third free ranging.

As soon as the player with 4 pieces fails at his endeavour, the player with three pieces forms a mill and removes the one set of two pieces that was able to form a potential mill.
16.7. 3 vs 3
A player who ends up with 3 pieces last is on the back foot. Excepting a few arrangements shown in the puzzle section of this book, the latecomer needs to keep blocking two mill lines to make the win more difficult for their opponent. In this case, the first-comer needs to jump to the other side of the board and work back in to the remaining piece. This will be shown in the second endgame below. The game can be loaded into Sanmill using the following QR code.

Example endgame 1 – infinite loop

Figure 253: An infinite loop
In this example moving from the board above, white is to move and declines the option to remove black to 3 pieces, then black closes their mill. 









Figure 254: Black closes the mill

White then forces black to open their mill, and gets in-between the pieces, forcing them apart in Figure 255. 

Figure 255: White forces black to move apart

Black remains close to the white pieces, which is a good strategy in general, and in this case allows black the opportunity to block white’s final mill, with a looping move. 


Figure 256: The infinite loop

There are no good options for both players other than the placements indicated in Figure 257.

Figure 257: The final result is a stalemate


Endgame 2 – skipping to the other side
Often, the leading player can get stuck with the opponent managing to block all but one move. This blocking is achieved by always ensuring white has only one line to play on directly, and by the following player keeping two relevant lines blocked. In this case, it is best for the lead player to move the game to the other side of the board, making the opponent fill a middle position between two mills to moving the game to the other side of the board. To investigate, we start at the position in Figure 258.
Figure 258: Keeping the lines blocked

In Figure 258, white is on the move and will close the mill at line 7. It cannot allow the dual potential mill to be created with pieces a1 and d3 so removes a1. This is because the piece at a1 is in a corner and closes two lines. It is better to remove that piece. In contrast, if you can keep relevant corner pieces in place and move a third non-cornered piece, it is best to do so. We continue in Figure 259.

Figure 259: Investigating options

White can then open the mill at line7 at a7 and black responds by filling that position. White cannot move to f2, as this will allow black to have two pieces together, and give the initiative back to black. Moving to g4 will give black a lot of control from a7 and g1, allowing a similar situation to the first endgame.
White instead moves to f6. Black is careful to always block two of the three potential mill pathways. In Figure 260 below, white is blocked at line 7, 6 and 4 when Black moves to g7.

Figure 260: Skipping stones
To escape the blocking pieces, white must move beyond black’s ability to block, by ensuring black moves the piece at g7, by going to line 1, and circling back anti-clockwise to create dual potential mills at lines g and 7. From there white forces black to move to d1 by placing at g1, and black cannot block both mills when white moves to g7 as shown in Figure 261.

Figure 261: A dual potential mill.

17. Conclusion
Regardless of the origins and history of Nine Men’s Morris, the game itself has enjoyed universal appeal with millennia of interest by avid and committed players spanning modern and ancient times. It is a thoroughly addictive game requiring concentration, focus, intelligence, mindfulness, and above all humility. The enduring appeal of the game is due partially to the requirement for deep strategic thinking. This appeal may have led to the game travelling the globe throughout the centuries since its inception. The simplicity of Nine Men’s Morris in terms of setup and components has also contributed to its success, making it available to anyone regardless of wealth or position.
Today, time-limited games requiring players to make a move in under 30 seconds can help to keep the resulting game-play within the five-to-ten-minute mark, easily fitting into a modern, busy schedule. Conversely, un-timed games or puzzles pondered in the company of oneself can be an engaging and rewarding way to pass the time.
The many benefits of playing games like Nine Men’s Morris include building memory, logic and reasoning skills and developing analytical thinking as well as spatial awareness. Even the act of learning new rules can develop your brain, according to Central Connecticut State University (2022). Additionally, a 2013 study found the risk of dementia was 15% lower for board game players (Dartigues JF, 2013), and playing board games has been shown to improve cognitive function (Ching-Teng, 2019).
This comprehensive guide provides valuable guidance for both beginners and more experienced players. It contains rich information on all the intricacies and depth of this fabulous and rewarding game and offers insights into the historical and cultural significance of a timeless activity. By embracing the strategies outlined within these pages, players can elevate their gaming experience, and are in a good position to work towards mastering it.  
18. Puzzle Games
The following are several puzzle games that may be contemplated in the tradition of ‘Bonus Socius’ and ‘Civus Bononiae’ mentioned earlier, which contained a number of Merels puzzles. 

18.1. Puzzle 1
This puzzle was posted by Christian Spiller on the Nine Men’s Morris Facebook group, from a game played on PlayOK; Link to the game: https://www.playok.com/p/?g=ml11744988#54 

Figure 262: Puzzle 1
Black played 1. … g4-f4 and quickly lost. Could he have played better? Why or why not?
Answer  #1 and #2, for import into Sanmill

                 
Figure 264: Puzzle 1 solutions
18.2. Puzzle 2
White on the move. Can they hold the draw?

Figure 265: Puzzle 2


Figure 266: Puzzle 2 solution

18.3. Puzzle 3
From the https://muehlespieler.de/ website, under Examples, Exercises, Variations

Figure 267: Puzzle 3
Can white play a mill and win?

Figure 268: Puzzle 3 origin

The answer here is no, but it is interesting to look at, and it is a good idea to avoid the situation when it comes up.
18.4. Puzzle 4
Can white play a mill and win?

Figure 269: Puzzle 4


Figure 270: Puzzle 4 solution

18.5. Puzzle 5
What is the only move available to black, and then the only move available to white, so they come out in a neutral game in the movement stage? All other moves will lead to losing trajectories.


Figure 271: Puzzle 5

Figure 272: Puzzle 5 solution

18.6. Puzzle 6
Moves completed from end of placement;
Wd1-g1
Bd7-a7
Wg1-d1
Black then moves 18 either up to g7 (A) or g1 (B)
In which case is it ok for white to move piece #3 to g4? Case A or case B?

Figure 273: Puzzle 6

Figure 274: Puzzle 6 - incorrect choice ramifications
18.7. Puzzle 7
White to move and win in under 5 moves. What are they?


Figure 275: Puzzle 7

Figure 276: Puzzle 7 solution




18.8. Puzzle 8
Last stage of placement, with one piece each to place and it is White’s move. What are the two best places for White to place?

Figure 277: Puzzle 8

Figure 278: Puzzle 8 solution

18.9. Puzzle 9
Another puzzle posted by Christian Spiller on the Facebook group Nine Men’s Morris, from a game on PlayOK;

Figure 279: Puzzle 9








Figure 281 & 282: Solution and link to PlayOK for puzzle 9
18.10. Puzzle 10
Find both the placement sequences for the below game where black wins with a mill to close on line 3 and alternately on line a. Black to place next.

Figure 282: Puzzle 10







Figure 283: Puzzle 10 - Line 3 solution & line a solution
18.12. Puzzle 11
Black to move. Can white force a draw or do they lose? Posted to FB by András Faragó.










Figure 285 Can white force a draw?








Figure 286: One solution to puzzle 11
18.13. Puzzle 12
Black to place a further two pieces, white to place one. What are the winning moves for black? Bonus points if you can figure out where white made their “dead move”.







Figure 297, Black with two placements left.






Figure 298, the solution to puzzle 12
19. References
Central Connecticut State University, 2022. 5 mental benefits of board games. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.ashevillenc.gov/news/wellness-wednesday-5-mental-benefits-of-board-games/
[Accessed February 23 2024].
Al-Isfahani , A. a.-F., 2010. Kitab al-Aghani. Beirut: Dar Sader.
Azimi, M., 2023. Parallels between Jesus and Mithra: A comparitive study, Ireland: by PhD.
Barret, J., 2021. Digitizing 300 manuscripts at the Bodleian. [Online] 
Available at: https://hab.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/en/blog/blog-post-31/?s=03
[Accessed 21st February 2024].
Bell, R., 1969. Board and table games from many civilisations. New York: Oxford University Press.
Berger, F., 1999. “Spielbretter aus Bosra in Syrien”.. Mitteilingen der ANISA, Volume 19, p. 23.
Berger, F., 2004. From circle and square to the image of the world: A possible interpretation for some petroglyphs of merels boards.. Rock art Research, pp. 11-25.
Board Game Geek, 2022. Forums - Rules - Mills question. [Online] 
Available at: https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2142785/mills-question
[Accessed 17 February 2024].
Caflisch, S., 2018. Learning to play and play in medieval education. Konstanz Working Group for Medieval History eV, Volume 58.
Chesani, F. e. a., 2018. Can Deep Networks Learn to Play by the Rules? A Case Study on Nine Men’s Morris.. IEEE transactions on games, 10(4), p. 344–353.
Ching-Teng, Y., 2019. Effect of board game activities on cognitive function improvement among older adults in adult day care centers. Social work in health care, 58(9), p. 825–838.
Dartigues JF, F.-S. A. L. G. M. V. M. A. H. O. J. B.-G. P. H. C., 2013. Playing board games, cognitive decline and dementia: a French population-based cohort study. BMJ Open, 3(8).
Drayton, M., 1961. The works of Michael Drayton, Volume 5. s.l.:Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Erdingbat, U., 2012. “Харбалгаснаас олдсон х л гт тоглоом (A board game found in Khar balgas).”. Mongolian Journal of Anthropology, Archaeology and Ethnology, 7(1), pp. 114-134.
GamesCrafters, n.d. Nine Men's Morris. [Online] 
Available at: http://gamescrafters.berkeley.edu/games.php?game=ninemensmorris
[Accessed 5 February 2024].
Gasser, R., 1995. Harnessing computational resources for efficient exhaustive search. s.l.:s.n.
Gasser, R., 1996. Solving Nine Men's Morris. Computational Intelligence, 12(1), pp. 24-41.
Gévay, G. E., & Danner, G. (2016). Calculating ultra-strong and extended solutions for Nine Men's Morris, Morabaraba, and Lasker Morris. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, 8(3), 256-267
GitHub, 2024. nine mens morris. [Online] 
Available at: https://github.com/topics/nine-mens-morris?o=desc&s=updated
[Accessed 23 February 2024].
Goddard, A., 1993. NINE MEN’S MORRIS: An Old Viking Game.. Saga-book, Volume 23, pp. 338-347.
Grise, J. d., 1338. Romance of Alexander, Alexander and Dindimus, Li Livres du Graunt Caam. Bruges: s.n.
Hall, M. A., 2005. The Whitby Merels Board. Yorkshire Archaeological Journal, Volume 77, p. 25.
Jaunting Jen, 2024. Nine Men’s Morris, Everywhere. [Online] 
Available at: https://jauntingjen.com/2014/04/15/nine-mens-morris-everywhere/
[Accessed 5 February 2024].
Kubiya Games, 2024. Nine Men's Morris. [Online] 
Available at: https://kubiyagames.com/blogs/mechanical-puzzles-blog/nine-men-s-morris
[Accessed 5 February 2024].
Lerner, J. A., n.d. BELIEVERS, PROSELYTIZERS, & TRANSLATORS, Religion among the Sogdians. [Online] 
Available at: https://sogdians.si.edu/believers-proselytizers-translators/
[Accessed 11th February 2024].
Massiot, G., 2017. Aachen Cathedral: Detail, Palantine Chapel, Throne of Charlemagne, Aachen : The University of Notre Dame.
Mazzilli, F., 2022. Roman Soldiers in the Religious, Social, and Spatial Network of the Hauran. Mythos, Volume 16.
Mkele, N., 1956. A Note on “Bantu Games”. Journal of the National Institute for Personnel Research, 6(3), pp. 132-134.
Murray, H. J. R., 1913. A history of chess. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pearse, R., 2000. The Roman Cult of Mithras. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.tertullian.org/rpearse/mithras/display.php?page=main
[Accessed 11th February 2024].
Pollard, G., 2024. Ways to play. [Online] 
Available at: https://games.porg.es/games/nine-mens-morris/
[Accessed 21 February 2024].
Pollard, G., 2024. Ways to play Morabaraba. [Online] 
Available at: https://games.porg.es/games/morabaraba/
[Accessed 21 February 2024].
RakingLight, n.d. Gaming up the Walls. [Online] 
Available at: https://rakinglight.co.uk/articles/gaming-up-the-walls/
[Accessed 5 February 2014].
Richter, J., 2023. German Names for Merels. Board game studies journal, 17(1), pp. 167-204.
Rosser, J. & Boas, A. J., 2006. Archaeology of the Military Orders. A Survey of the Urban Centres, Rural Settlements and Castles of the Military Orders in the Latin East (c. 1120–1291). Abingdon and New York: Routlidge.
Smithsonian, n.d. THE SOGDIANS Influencers on the Silk Roads. [Online] 
Available at: https://sogdians.si.edu/introduction/
[Accessed 11th February 2024].
Tame The Board Game, 2017. Games You Can Make At Home – Nine Men’s Morris. [Online] 
Available at: https://tametheboardgame.com/category/published-games/nine-mens-morris/
[Accessed 5 February 2024].
The Moscow Times, 2018. Archeologists Discover Medieval Board Game in Secret Castle Crypt in Russia. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2018/09/06/archeologists-discover-medieval-board-game-secret-castle-crypt-russia-a62792
[Accessed 1 March 2024].
The Moscow Times, 2018. Medieval Russia: Ancient Board Game Discovered in Secret Castle Chamber. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2018/09/06/archeologists-discover-medieval-board-game-secret-castle-crypt-russia-a62792
[Accessed 1 March 2024].
Uberti, M., 2012. The Merels board enigma, s.l.: Narcissus self publishing.
Wells, D., 2012. Games and mathematics : subtle connections. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
World Mill Game umbrella organization, 2023. World Mill Game umbrella organization. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.muehlespiel.eu/
[Accessed 17 February 2024].
Wu, S. & Sebillaud, P., 2020. Research on the merels game in medieval China. Asian Archeology, pp. 41-52.

20. Appendix
This page has been left blank by Microsoft Word. For reasons unbeknownst to this author, it cannot be changed. Please see the next page for the appendix documents, where, it seems, they are permitted.

20.1. The current (09 Nov 2024) list of GM and MM players, from WMD



20.2. Historical tournaments registered with WMD








20.3. QR Code game moves
Figure 32
1. c5 f4	2. e3 b4
3. e5 d5	4. e4×d5 d5
5. c3 a4	6. c4×b4 b4
7. d3×f4 f4	8. d7 d2
9. f2 g7	10. d7-d6 g7-d7
11. d6-f6 d7-d6	
 
Figure 38
1. d2 d6	2. f4 b4
3. e3 e4	4. d3 d1
5. c3×e4 e4	6. f2 f6
7. b2×f6 f6	8. b6 a4
9. c4 c5	10. f4-g4 f6-f4
11. g4-g7 a4-a7	12. g7-d7 a7-a4
13. d7-a7 a4-a1	14. a7-a4 d1-g1
15. d2-d1 g1-g4×d1	16. d3-d2×a1 d6-d5
17. d2-d3×d5 c5-d5	18. d3-d2×b4 d5-d6
19. d2-d3×d6 g4-b4	20. d3-d2
 
Figure 44
1. d2 d6	2. f4 b4
3. e3 e4	4. d3 d1
5. c3×e4 e4	6. f2 b2
7. f6×b2 b2	8. b6 c4
9. a4 g4	10. a4-a1 b4-a4
11. b6-b4 a4-a7	12. a1-a4 a7-d7
13. a4-a7 d7-g7	14. a7-d7 d1-g1×d7
15. d2-d1 b2-d2	16. b4-a4 g7-d7
17. a4-a7 d7-g7×a7	18. d1-a1 g7-d7
19. a1-a4 d7-g7×a4	
 
Figure 49
1. d2 d6	2. f4 b4
3. c4 e4	4. e5 d1
5. b6 d7	6. d5 f2
7. g1 a4	8. a7 c3
9. g7 g4	
 
Figure 65
1. d6 f4	2. b4 d2
3. b6 f6	4. b2×d2 d2
5. f2 c4	6. a7 d5
7. c5 e3	8. d3 g1
 
Figure 78
1. a7-d7 a4-b4	2. e4-e5×e3 f4-e4
3. f2-f4 g4-g1	4. d1-d2 g1-d1
5. d2-f2×d6 d1-d2	6. f6-d6×e4 d2-a4×f4
7. e5-e4 a4-e5	8. d6-f6 e5-a4×e4
9. f6-d6×a4	
 
Figure 82
1. d6 d2	2. b4 f4
3. g4 b6	4. f2 a4
5. e4 a7	6. a1 d3
7. d1 g1	8. c3 d5
9. d7 e5	10. c3-c4 d3-c3
11. c4-c5 c3-c4	12. e4-e3 e5-e4
13. e3-d3 e4-e3	14. d3-c3 e3-d3
15. d7-g7 a7-d7	16. b4-b2 b6-b4×d6
 
Figure 88
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. e3 g7
7. c3 a7×c3	8. d3 c3
9. e5 e4	10. d6-d5 d7-d6
11. c4-c5×d6 b4-b2×b6	12. c5-c4 g7-d7
13. c4-c5×e4 b2-b4	14. f4-e4×b4 f2-f4
15. d5-d6 a7-a4	16. e5-d5 a4-b4
17. d5-e5×f4 c3-c4	18. e4-f4 d7-a7
19. d6-d5×c4 a7-e4	20. c5-c4 b4-c5
21. c4-c3×e4	
 
Figure 94
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. e3 g7
7. c3 a7×c3	8. d3 c3
9. e5 e4	10. d6-d5 b4-b2×d5
11. f6-d6 b2-b4	12. f4-f6×c3 b4-b2×c4
13. b6-b4 g7-g4	14. b4-b6×g4 f2-f4
15. d3-c3 f4-f2×c3	16. f6-f4 a7-a4
17. f4-f6×e4 b2-b4	18. f6-f4 b4-b2×f4
19. d6-d5 d2-d1	20. e5-e4 d1-d2×e4
21. b6-e5 a4-b4	22. d5-e4×d7 b4-a4
23. e5-b4 d2-d1	24. e4-d2 d1-a1
25. e3-d1 a4-a7	26. b4-d3×a1 a7-f4
27. d3-f6 f2-d3	28. d2-g1 b2-a1
29. g1-d6 f4-b6	30. f6-d5 a1-d7
31. d6-e5 b6-c5	32. d5-g1 d7-a1
33. d1-g4 d3-g7	34. g1-e4 g7-f4
35. g4-e3×f4 *	
 
Figure 101
1. e4-b4 g7-e4	2. g4-c4 f2-a4
3. c4-b6 g1-b2	4. b4-f6 b2-d6
5. b6-f2×d6 *	
 
Figure 107
1. d6 d2	2. b4 f4
3. d7 d5	4. a4 c4
5. f2 e3	6. c5 b6
7. d1 a1	8. e4 g7
9. d3 g1	10. d6-f6 b6-d6
11. a4-a7 a1-a4	12. b4-b6 c4-b4
13. c5-c4 d5-c5	14. d3-c3 e3-d3
15. e4-e5 f4-g4×d1	16. e5-e4 g1-d1×e4
17. f2-f4 d1-g1×f4	18. f6-f4 g1-d1×f4 0-1
 
Figure 112
1. f4 b4	2. d2 d6
3. d5 e4	4. d7 b6
5. b2 f6×b2	6. b2 f2
7. a7 g7	8. c5 e5
9. e3 d3	10. a7-a4 g7-g4
11. a4-a1 b4-a4	12. b2-b4 g4-g1
13. a1-d1 a4-a1	14. c5-c4 a1-a4
15. c4-c3 a4-a1	16. d5-c5 e5-d5
17. b4-c4×d3	
 
Figure 119
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. c4 d7	4. d3 g4
5. c3 c5	6. f6 f2
7. b6×f2 f2	8. e3×f2 f2
9. a4 g1	10. e3-e4 d7-g7×c3
11. c4-c3 b4-b2×c3 *	
 
Figure 135
1. d6 d2	2. f4 f2
3. b2 b4	4. g7 e4
5. d1 c3	6. c4 e3
7. d3 e5×d3	8. d3 g4
9. d7 b6	10. d7-a7 e5-d5
11. d6-d7×e3	
 
Figure 139
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. d5 d7	4. g4 e4
5. d1 e5	6. e3 b2
7. f2 f6	8. b6 c5
9. c4 g7	10. d1-a1 b4-a4
11. b6-b4 a4-a7×a1	12. b4-a4 b2-b4
13. e3-d3 e4-e3	14. d3-c3 e3-d3
15. f4-e4 f6-f4	16. e4-e3 e5-e4
17. d5-e5 c5-d5	18. c4-c5 b4-c4
19. a4-a1 a7-a4	20. a1-d1 a4-a7×g4
21. d1-a1 g7-g4×d6	22. a1-a4 g4-g7×a4
 
Figure 152
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b6
3. c4 g4	4. d1 a7
5. b4 a4	6. a1 g1
7. g7 d5	8. f2 f6
9. c3 c5 *	
 
Figure 155
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. c4 e4	4. d3 d7
5. a4 e5	6. e3 c3
7. d1 b2	8. f2 b6×f2
9. f2 f6	10. f4-g4 f6-f4
11. g4-g1 d7-g7	12. a4-a1×g7 b4-a4
13. c4-b4 f4-g4	14. d6-d5 b6-d6
15. f2-f4 d6-f6	16. d5-c5 e5-d5
17. b4-b6 b2-b4	18. c5-c4 f6-d6
19. f4-f6 d5-c5	20. f6-f4 d6-d5
21. f4-f6 e4-e5×c4	
 
Figure 159
1. e5-d5 g7-g4	2. d7-g7 g4-g1
3. g7-g4 g1-d1	4. g4-g1 c4-b4
5. f4-f2×b4 c3-d3	6. f2-f4 c5-c4
7. b2-b4 c4-c5	8. f4-e4 d3-e3
9. b4-c4 e3-d3	10. e4-e3 d3-c3
11. e3-d3	
 
Figure 161
1. e5-e4 g1-d1	2. g4-g1 d1-a1
3. g1-d1 d7-g7	4. d6-d7 g7-g4
5. a4-a7 a1-a4	6. e4-e5 a4-a1
7. d7-d6 a1-a4	8. a7-d7 g4-g1
9. e5-e4 g1-g4	10. e4-e3 a4-a7
11. d1-a1 a7-a4	12. e3-e4 a4-a7
13. d7-g7 a7-d7	14. a1-a4 d7-a7
15. d6-d7 g4-g1	16. g7-g4 g1-d1
17. g4-g1 d1-a1	18. g1-d1 f4-f6
19. e4-f4 d5-d6	20. c5-d5 b4-b6×c4
21. a4-b4 a7-a4	22. d5-c5 d6-d5
23. d7-d6 a4-a7	24. b4-c4×d3 a7-d7
25. c3-d3×d7 a1-a4	26. d1-a1 b6-b4
27. a1-d1×f6 d5-c3	28. d2-f2 c3-f6
29. f2-d2	
 
Figure 162
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e4
7. c3 d3	8. c5×d3 d3
9. d1 g4	10. d6-d7 b4-b2×f4
11. d7-d6×g4 b2-b4	12. f6-f4 b4-b2×f4
13. c4-b4 f2-f4	14. b4-c4×b2 f4-f6
15. c4-b4 e4-f4	16. b4-c4×d2 d3-d2
17. c3-d3 d2-f2×d3	18. e3-d3 f2-d2
19. d3-c3×d2 d5-e5	20. d1-d2
 
Figure 164
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e4
7. c3 d3	8. c5×d3 d3
9. d1 g4	10. d6-d7 b4-b2×f4
11. d7-d6×g4 b2-b4	12. f6-f4 b4-b2×f4
13. c4-b4 f2-f4	14. b4-c4×b2 f4-f6
15. c4-b4 e4-f4	16. b4-c4×d2 d3-d2
17. c3-d3 d2-f2×d3	18. e3-d3 f2-d2
19. d3-c3×d2 d5-e5	20. d1-d2
 
Figure 168
1. f4-f6×b4 g4-g1×a4	2. f6-f4 e4-e3
3. c4-c3 e3-d3	4. f4-f6×d3 d1-d2
5. g7-g4 *	

Figure 168b
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. b2 f6	4. c4 e4
5. d1 d7	6. a7 g1
7. e3 c5	8. e5 c3
9. g4 a4	10. e3-d3 a4-a1
11. g4-g7 c5-d5	12. g7-g4 *
 
Figure 170
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. c4 e4	4. d3 d5
5. a4 g4	6. d1 b2
7. f2 f6	8. b6 e5
9. e3 c5×c4	
 
Figure 174
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d5	6. e4 g4
7. e3×g4 g4	8. b2 d1
9. d3 d7	10. d3-c3 d2-d3
11. b2-d2 d1-a1	12. d2-d1 a1-a4
13. d1-a1 a4-a7	14. a1-a4 g4-g7×a4
15. f4-g4 f2-f4	16. c3-c4 a7-a4
17. g4-g1 a4-a7×g1	18. c4-c3 a7-a4
19. c3-c4 a4-a7×c4	
 
Figure 175
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 e4	6. d5 d7
7. c5×d7 d7	8. a4 c4
9. b2 d1	10. a4-a7 d2-d3
11. b2-d2 e4-e3	12. e5-e4 c4-c3×c5
13. d5-c5 c3-c4	14. d6-d5 c4-c3×d2
15. e4-e5×f2 d7-d6	16. c5-c4 d3-d2
17. c4-c5×d6 d2-d3×b6	18. d5-d6 d3-d2
19. d6-d5×d2 d1-d2	20. d5-d6 d2-d3×d6
21. f6-d6 d3-d2	22. d6-d5×e3 b4-d3
23. a7-d7 c3-d1×f4	24. d5-d6 d3-d5
 
Figure 176
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 e4	6. d5 d7
7. c5×d7 d7	8. a4 b2×a4
9. a1 c4	10. a1-d1 d2-d3
11. d1-d2 c4-c3	12. c5-c4 e4-e3×d2
13. c4-c5×f2 e3-e4	14. c5-c4 e4-e3×e5
15. d5-e5 d3-d2	16. d6-d5 d2-d3×d5
17. f6-d6 d3-d2	18. f4-f6×e3
 
Figure 177
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d5	6. e4 g4
7. e3×g4 g4	8. d1 d3
9. a4 d7	10. a4-a7 d7-g7
11. a7-d7 b4-b2×d1	12. b6-b4 d2-d1
13. b4-b6×d3 d1-d2×d7	14. e3-d3 d2-d1
15. d3-e3×d1 f2-d2	16. e3-d3 d2-d1
17. d3-e3×d1 b2-d2	18. f4-f2 g4-f4
19. b6-b4 d2-d1	20. e3-d3 d1-g1
21. b4-b6×f4 d5-g4×e4	22. f6-f4 g7-f6
23. d3-e3 f6-g7×f4	24. f2-f4
 
Figure 178
	
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d5	6. e4 g4
7. e3×g4 g4	8. d1 b2×f4
9. c5 d3	
 
Figure 179
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d5	6. e4 e3
7. g4×e3 e3	8. b2 d3
9. c3 d1	
 
Figure 180
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d7	6. e4 e3
7. g4×e3 e3	8. b2 g1
9. c4 d5	10. c4-c3 g1-d1
11. c3-d3 d1-g1	12. d3-c3 *
 
Figure 181
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 a4	6. c4 d1
7. d3 a1	8. g1 a7×g1
9. g1 g4	10. c4-c5 b4-b2×c5
11. b6-b4 a7-d7	12. b4-b6×d7 b2-b4
13. d3-e3 b4-b2×g1	14. f4-e4×d1 d2-d1
15. f6-f4 g4-g1×f4	16. e4-f4 d1-d2×f4
17. e3-e4 f2-f4	18. b6-b4 a1-d1
19. e4-e3 d2-d3	20. e5-d5 b2-d2×d5
21. d6-a1 d2-b2	22. b4-d2 f4-e4 *
 
Figure 183
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. e5 d3	6. d1 c4
7. a4 c3	8. e3 c5×e3
9. e3 e4	10. e5-d5 b4-b2×d5 *
 
Figure 185
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. g7 g4	4. d7 d5
5. a7×d5 d5	6. f6 f2
7. b6×f2 f2	8. c4 a4
9. b2 c3	10. f4-e4 f2-f4
11. e4-e3 c3-d3	12. c4-c3 g4-g1
13. g7-g4 g1-d1×a7	14. d7-a7 d1-g1
15. d6-d7 g1-d1×d7	16. a7-d7 d5-d6
17. g4-g1 a4-a7	18. c3-c4 d2-f2
19. b2-d2 b4-a4	20. c4-b4 d1-a1×b4
21. g1-d1 a4-b4	22. d2-b2 b4-a4×d1 *
 
Figure 187
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. g7 g4	4. d7 d5
5. a7×d5 d5	6. f6 b6
7. f2×d2 d2	8. c4 a4
9. d3 e4	10. d3-e3 e4-e5
11. f4-e4 d2-b2×f2	12. f6-f4 b2-d2
13. d6-f6 d2-b2×f4	14. d7-d6 b2-d2
15. d6-d7×d2 b6-d6	16. c4-c5 b4-b2
17. e3-d3 a4-b4	18. c5-c4 d6-b6×d3
19. d7-d6 g4-f4	20. d6-d7×f4 b6-d6
21. f6-f4 d6-b6×f4	22. d7-d6 b2-d2
23. d6-d7×d5 d2-b2×e4	24. d7-d6 e5-e4
25. g7-g4 e4-e3	26. g4-f4 e3-e4
27. c4-c5 b2-d2	28. c5-d5 e4-e3
29. d5-e5 e3-e4	
 
Figure 188
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. g7 d7	6. g4 e4
7. g1×e4 e4	8. b2 d3
9. d1 d5	10. d1-a1 d2-d1
11. b2-d2 d3-c3	12. a1-a4 c3-c4
13. a4-a1 c4-c5	14. a1-a4 e4-e5×a4
15. f4-e4 f2-f4	16. d2-d3 c5-c4
17. d3-c3 c4-c5×c3	18. e4-e3 c5-c4
19. e3-d3 c4-c5×d3	
 
Figure 189
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 b6	4. f2×b6 b6
5. g7 g4	6. d7 d5
7. a7×d5 d5	8. c4 d3
9. d1 a4	10. f4-e4 d2-b2×c4
11. e4-f4×a4 b4-a4	12. f4-e4 g4-f4
13. g7-g4 a4-b4×d7	14. g4-g7 d3-c3
15. f2-d2 d5-c5	16. d6-d7×c5 b4-c4
17. e4-e3 c4-b4×d2	18. d7-d6 c3-c4
19. a7-a4 b2-d2	20. d6-d7 d2-b2×g7
21. d1-d2 b6-d6	22. e3-d3 d6-b6×d2
23. f6-d6 b2-d2	24. d7-g7 c4-c3
25. d6-d7 f4-f2	26. a4-a7×f2 b6-d6
 
Figure 192
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b2×f4
5. d3 g4	6. c4 c3
7. a4 b4	8. g7 d7
9. e5 d5	10. f6-f4 d5-c5
11. f4-f6×d7 f2-f4	12. e5-d5 f4-f2×d5
13. d6-d7 f2-f4	14. a4-a7×b2 f4-f2
15. d7-d6×f2 c5-d5	16. d6-d7×d5 g4-f4
17. a7-a4 f4-f2	18. a4-a7×f2 d2-d6
19. a7-a4 c3-a7	20. d3-e3
 
Figure 194
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b2×f4
5. d3 g4	6. e4 d7
7. e3 a1	8. e5×a1 g1
9. c3×g1 g1	10. b6-b4 d7-g7×d6
11. e4-f4 g7-d7	12. f4-e4×g1 f2-f4
13. e5-d5 f4-f2×d5	14. e4-f4 d7-g7
15. e3-e4 d2-d1	16. e4-e3×d1 f2-d2
17. e3-e4 d2-d1	18. e4-e3×d1 b2-g1×f6)
19. e3-e4	
 
Figure 200
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. b2 c5	6. c4 e5
7. d1 d5×c4	8. c4 g4
9. e3 g7	10. e3-e4 g7-d7
11. d1-a1 g4-g1	12. f4-g4 f2-f4
13. g4-g7 g1-d1	14. g7-g4 d2-d3
15. b2-d2 *	
 
Figure 203
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. d3 d5
7. g1 e5	8. e3 c5×e3
9. b2 a1	10. f4-e4 f2-f4
11. e4-e3 a1-a4	12. c4-c3×b4 c5-c4
13. b6-b4 c4-c5×d6	14. f6-d6 e5-e4
15. d6-b6×d5 d7-d6	16. c3-c4 d2-f2
17. c4-c3×d6 f4-f6	18. b2-d2 e4-f4×d2
19. d3-d2 *	
 
Figure 205a
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. d3 d5
7. g1 g4	8. c3 e3
9. c5×d5 d5	10. g1-d1 e3-e4
11. d3-e3 d2-d3	12. d1-d2 *
 
Figure 205b
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. d3 a7
7. e3 g7×d3	8. d3 c3
9. e5 e4	10. d6-d5 b4-b2×d5
11. f6-d6 b2-b4	12. f4-f6×c3 b4-b2×c4
13. b6-b4 g7-g4	14. b4-b6×g4 b2-b4
15. d3-c3 e4-f4	16. c3-c4 f4-g4
17. c4-c5 g4-g7×c5	18. e3-d3 g7-g4
19. d3-c3 *	
 
Figure 205c
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 e4	6. d3 d5
7. c3 e3	8. c5×d5 (8. c5×b4 b2×d3 9. a4 b4 10. d6-d7 d5-e5×d7 11. c5-d5) *
 
Figure 205d
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. d3 c5
7. e3 c3	8. g4 e4
9. b2 a1	10. d6-d5 d7-d6
11. g4-g1 a1-d1 *	
 
Figure 205e
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. d3 c5
7. e3 c3	8. g4 e4
9. b2 a1	10. d6-d5 d7-d6
11. g4-g1 a1-d1 *	
 
Figure 205f
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 g1	6. d3 a1
7. c3 e3	8. c5×e3 e3
9. b2×d1	10. c5-d5 d2-d1×d5
11. d3-d2 g1-g4	12. d6-d5 g4-g1×d5
13. f6-d6 g1-g4	14. f4-f6×g4 f2-f4
15. d6-d5 f4-g4	16. d5-d6×g4 *
 
Figure 207
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e4
7. c3 c5	8. d3×c5 c5
9. a1 d7	10. a1-a4 e4-e5×c4
11. c3-c4 e5-e4	12. c4-c3×b4 e4-e5×a4
13. b6-b4 c5-c4	14. b4-b6×c4
 
Figure 209
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e5
7. c5 c3	8. g4 e4
9. d1 a1	10. d6-d7 b4-b2×b6
11. d7-g7 c3-d3	
 
Figure 210
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 a7	6. e3 g7
7. d7 d5	8. e4 g4
9. e5×b4 b2×f4	10. b6-b4 d2-d1
11. b4-b6×d1	
 
Figure 213
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e4
7. c3 d3	8. c5×d3 d3
9. d1 d7	10. f4-g4 f2-f4
11. g4-g7 f4-f2	12. f6-f4 b4-b2×f4
13. c4-b4 f2-f4	14. b4-c4×b2
 
Figure 214
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 e4
7. c3 d3	8. c5×d3 d3
9. d1 b2×d1	10. d6-d7 d5-d6
11. c5-d5 d2-d1	12. d5-c5×d3 d1-d2×e3
13. c3-d3 d2-d1	14. d3-c3×f2 b2-d2
15. c3-d3 e4-e3	16. d3-c3×e3 d2-d3
17. c5-d5 b4-b2	18. d5-c5×d6 b2-d2×d7
19. c5-d5	
 
Figure 216
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 b2×c4	6. c4 d3
7. d1 d7	8. e5 g7
9. a7 d5	
 
Figure 217
	
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d5	6. e3 d1
7. d3 c3	8. g4 e4
9. a7 d7	10. a7-a4 b4-b2×d3
11. b6-b4×d1 c3-d3	12. a4-a1 d2-d1
13. a1-a4×d3	
 
Figure 219
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. e3 g4
7. c3 c5	8. d3×c5 c5
9. a4 e4	10. a4-a1 b4-b2×c4
11. c3-c4 b2-b4	12. c4-c3×b4 c5-c4
13. b6-b4	
 
Figure 221
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 e4	6. e3 c3
7. d1 d7	8. e5 d5
9. a1 g4	10. a1-a4 g4-g1
11. f4-g4 f2-f4	12. a4-a7 b4-b2
 
Figure 222
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 d7	6. e3 c3
7. e4 g4	8. e5×g4 g4
9. b2 g1	10. e3-d3 d7-g7×b2
11. d3-e3×d2 g1-d1	12. d6-d5 d1-g1×d5
13. f6-d6 g1-d1	14. f4-f6×d1 f2-d2
15. e4-f4 d2-d1	16. f4-e4×d1 c3-d3
17. e4-f4 d3-d2	18. d6-d5 d2-d1
19. f4-e4×d1	
 
Figure 223
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b4
3. f6 f2	4. b6×b4 b4
5. c4 a1	6. e3 d1
7. d3 g1×d3	8. d3 c3
9. e5 e4	10. d6-d5 b4-b2×d5
11. f6-d6 a1-a4	12. f4-f6×c3 a4-a1×c4
13. b6-b4 a1-a4	14. b4-b6×g1 b2-b4
15. d6-d5 b4-b2×d5	16. e5-d5 *
 
Figure 226
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b6
3. c3 b2	4. f2 b4×f2
5. f2 f6	6. c5 c4
7. a4 d5	8. e3 d3
9. d1 g4	10. e3-e4 d3-e3
11. c3-d3 c4-c3	12. c5-c4 d5-c5
13. d1-a1 g4-g7	14. f4-g4 f6-f4
15. a1-d1 c5-d5	16. a4-a1
 
Figure 230
1. d6 d2	2. f4 b2
3. f2 f6	4. g7 d5
5. a4 c4	6. d1 c3
7. a7 c5×a7	8. e5 d7
9. e4 g4	10. e4-e3
 
Figure 253
1. d6-d7 c4-c3xd7	2. f4-b4 a4-a1
3. d5-d1 a1-a4	4. d1-a1 d3-d2
5. a7-d3 e3-e4	6. a1-c4 d2-f2
7. b4-d2 a4-a1	8. c4-d1xf2 a1-f4
9. d1-g4 e4-d1	10. d3-g1 c3-g7
11. g1-f2 g7-b2	12. d2-g1 b2-g7 *
 
Figure 258
1. f4-g7×a1 d3-e4	2. a7-f4 g4-a7
3. g7-f6 a7-f2	4. f6-a7 f2-g7
5. d7-a4 g7-a1	6. a4-f6 a1-f2
7. f6-a1 f2-a4	8. f4-g1 e4-d1
9. a1-g7 d1-g4	10. g1-d7×a4
 



21. About the Author
The author is a PhD candidate at Western Sydney University, having completed a Bachelor of Engineering (Honours level 1) with a major in Electronics and a minor in Biomedical studies. He achieved the highest GPA  of his cohort and received a University Medal.
Following graduation, the author pursued a PhD focused on biomedical devices and signal analysis, and is exploring the relationship between sleep apnea, and blood pressure and heart rate variance.
He has been playing Nine Men’s Morris for well over a decade and wished a book like this had been available all that time.
He has four beautiful children and a very supportive and loving wife. Ben can be contacted at the Nine Men’s Morris group on Facebook, or his YouTube, X.com and TikTok channels using the following QR code. You can also use the feedback form given at the QR code or by going to https://nmmstrategy.start.page/

He can also be emailed at this address: benmarkbrandwood@gmail.com (although it is not checked often).

22. Acknowledgments
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the following individuals who have contributed to (or hindered in) the creation and publication of this book:

Mills Community: Since the first edition of this book was published, the author has e-met many influential mills players and members of the community who, like the author, love this game. Big thanks to Christian Spiller, Matt Littlewood, Andras Farago, Markus Schaub ( for a lot of help with game approaches, modern history), Elif, Ferenc Volman (Images and other Mills data) for your interest, supportive comments and / or simply your passion for the game. A special thanks to Calcitem Studio for Sanmill, for all the app updates, for putting numbers on stones, enabling QR codes and game annotations and many other app additions as well as precise feedback on the book and Mills history. 

Thank you also to all the people of every skill level who humble me in games of Nine Men’s Morris, and in so doing teach me how to play better. 
Family: Special thanks to my family who have dealt with my mental absenteeism while writing this book, and for having patience with my writing – so far it has only taken 2 years.. Without you, writing this book would have been impossible to achieve. Thank you for making my days rich and rewarding and full of love.
Editor and Proofreader: Special thanks to my beautiful wife, Rachel, and my mum, Vivienne, who have no interest in this subject at all, yet still spent hours finding all the misused semicolons and misplaced capital letters, among other things.
Cover Designer: Thank you again to my wife for the cover design, and for making everything in our lives neat and professional. I don’t know what I’d do without you.
PhD Supervisors: Another thank you to my PhD supervisors who keep me so busy with papers and coding for signals analysis, building of electronic devices, for making this book a near unachievable task. Thank you for the challenges and opportunities to grow. I hope my Thesis does not become as long as this book.
Readers and Testers: Thanks to James and Clay, my brothers, for many years of playing every type of game (strategy or other) when we were kids. Thanks again to some in the mills community who read parts of the second edition.
Additional Support: Thank you to my four beautiful children aged from four to 16, for playing Nine Men’s Morris with me (sometimes by the rules). I hope you always have these and many more memories of our time together as you grow up to become the best version of yourselves that you can be. Look after yourself, kiddo. Take deep breaths. The rest can wait.

